Preprint
ARSM: AUTO-REGRESSIVE STATE MACHINE
FOR
AGENTIC REASONING COMPRESSION
Xiafeng Man ∗
College of Future Information Technology
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
xfmanacad@outlook.com
Siyuan Ye ∗
College of Future Information Technology
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
syye26@m.fudan.edu.cn
Xiaosong Ma †
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong, China
xiaosong16.ma@connect.polyu.hk
ABSTRACT
While Large Language Model (LLM)-based agents demonstrate strong capabili-
ties in long-horizon tasks by interleaving reasoning with external environment in-
teractions, the continuous accumulation of context rapidly creates a critical mem-
ory bottleneck. Existing memory compression methods rely on task-specific opti-
mization or external auxiliary models, introducing significant computational over-
head. Furthermore, the resulting compressed representations tend to lose struc-
tured relationships, leading to information dilution, attention collapse, and de-
graded decision consistency.
To address these limitations, we propose Auto-Regressive State Machine
(ARSM), a lightweight training-free framework that enables in-situ reasoning
compression through structured state evolution. ARSM introduces two key com-
ponents: (i) a trajectory abstraction mechanism that reorganizes interaction histo-
ries into compact Hypothesis–Action–Result (HAR) micro-chains; (ii) a dynamic
state machine that regulates hierarchical memory through atomic operations and
a compression-control parameter. These components are unified within an auto-
regressive, self-compressive generation space, where each model output jointly
performs external action execution and internal state updates.
We evaluate ARSM on Webshop, Multi-Objective Multi-Hop QA, and SWE-
Bench Lite datasets. Experimental results show that ARSM maintains the task per-
formance while simultaneously reducing token consumption, offering a practical,
cost-effective route toward scalable autonomous agents for long-horizon tasks.
Code is available at https://github.com/leo-xfm/ARSM.
1
INTRODUCTION
Current agentic artificial intelligence (Agentic AI) models have shown remarkable capabilities in
solving complex tasks. Built upon Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning (Wei et al., 2022) and tool-
use mechanisms (Schick et al., 2023), these agents typically operate through a multi-turn reason-
ing–action–observation interaction paradigm (Yao et al., 2023). In complex domains such as soft-
ware engineering (SWE), this interleaved reasoning methodology (Yang et al., 2024b) has proven
effective in handling long-horizon tasks, including code debugging and error localization.
However, as interaction histories grow, agents must repeatedly process observations that differ sub-
stantially in their relevance to future decisions. In software debugging, for example, a file inspection
∗Equal Contribution.
†Corresponding Author.
1
arXiv:2609.32852v1  [cs.CL]  26 Sep 2026


Preprint
or test run may produce a long output, whereas a later decision may depend on only the hypoth-
esis being tested, the action taken, and the resulting evidence. Retaining every output increases
context usage, while removing earlier interactions can discard information needed to interpret sub-
sequent actions. This motivates a memory representation that distinguishes ongoing investigations,
completed sub-tasks, and failed attempts, rather than treating all past interactions identically.
To address the challenges above, prior work has explored memory management and context com-
pression strategies.
Methods such as LLMLingua (Jiang et al., 2023) and retrieval augmenta-
tion (Fang et al., 2025) adopt token compression schemes and prune historical contexts. Recent
approaches (Su et al., 2026; Ye et al., 2025) attempt to compress historical trajectories through
learned policies, retrieval augmentation, or external distillation modules. However, it adds compu-
tational overhead and lacks agentic real-time intuition, risking technical detail loss during summa-
rization (Luo et al., 2026).
These observations motivate a more specific question: how can an agent maintain a compact
task state that supports subsequent decisions as its interaction history grows? We propose Auto-
Regressive State Machine (ARSM), a training-free framework for structured context management.
ARSM combines compact records of past interactions with explicit rules for updating task progress,
failure lessons, milestones, and active reasoning paths. Its central objective is to reduce the amount
of historical context carried forward while retaining information relevant to the ongoing task.
Specifically, ARSM consists of two core components. The first one is the trajectory abstraction via
Hypothesis–Action–Result (HAR) micro-chains. We reorganize the conventional Reasoning—
Action—Observation paradigm into Hypothesis–Action–Observation–Result chain, which can be
abstracted into a logical HAR micro-chain. As this is executed by the model itself, it can intrinsi-
cally retain the reasoning focus and filter out redundant environmental noise while preserving the
underlying structural causal topology of the reasoning process. The second one is the dynamic state
machine and sliding window. Building upon abstraction, we introduce a dynamic state machine
to represent and maintain a hierarchical internal state (e.g., task progress and failure constraints),
evolved by a set of atomic operations (e.g., push, fold, prune). It also employs a dynamic slid-
ing window mechanism to explicitly bound the token length with a compression-control parameter,
allowing for a controllable trade-off between working memory capacity and state sparsity.
These two components are then unified within an auto-regressive, self-compressing generation
space, where each model output yields: (i) executable actions for environmental interaction, and
(ii) structured metadata for updating the internal state. As illustrated in Figure 1, this establishes a
dual-loop architecture that tightly couples external execution with timely internal state evolution.
Inner
Update
LLM Agent
External Tools
ARSM
Execution
Loop
State 
Evolution
Loop
Outputt
Statet
Statet
Auto-Regressive (AR) Self-Compressive Space
t

Toolcall Actiont
Evolutiont
Statet-1
Figure 1: Overview of the dual-loop architecture. It contains two cyclical processes: (i) exe-
cution loop, which manages direct interactions with external tools and feeds back environmental
output; and (ii) state evolution loop, which synchronizes agent’s cognition with ARSM. The Auto-
Regressive Self-Compressive Space acts as a unified generation space, dispatching tool-call action
to the environment and evolution metadata to drive ARSM’s inner state update: Statet−1 →Statet.
We conduct a systematic evaluation of the proposed method on three representative datasets: Web-
Shop (Yao et al., 2022), Multi-Objective Multi-Hop QA (Yang et al., 2018; Ho et al., 2020; Trivedi
et al., 2022; Aksitov et al., 2023), and SWE-Bench Lite (Jimenez et al., 2024). Experimental results
show that on WebShop, ARSM consistently improves the reward across different backbone model
families; on 16-Objective Multi-Hop QA, it achieves improved EM and F1 scores. Across all eval-
uated datasets, ARSM substantially reduces token costs by up to 82%. These findings demonstrate
that structured chain construction and state compression are key factors in improving both efficiency
and performance in long-horizon reasoning.
2


Preprint
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We introduce Auto-Regressive State Machine (ARSM), a training-free context-
management framework in which the agent generates memory-update metadata alongside
its next action, without requiring fine-tuning or an auxiliary compression model.
• We combine Hypothesis–Action–Result records with an event-driven controller that man-
ages task progress, failure lessons, milestones, and active interaction records. A compres-
sion control parameter adjusts the capacities of structured memory and recent raw history.
• We evaluate ARSM on WebShop, Multi-Objective Multi-Hop QA, and SWE-bench Lite.
The results characterize its task-dependent benefits and cost–accuracy trade-offs, while
component comparisons and trajectory analyses examine the behavior and limitations of
the proposed memory design.
2
RELATED WORK
Interleaved Reasoning in Agents.
Building upon Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning (Wei et al.,
2022) and tool-use integration (Schick et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024), LLM-based agents em-
ploying interleaved reasoning paradigms, characterized by multi-turn interactions (Yao et al., 2023;
Shinn et al., 2023), have demonstrated superior performance in solving complex problems. Recent
work (Jin et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024) has further improved general-purpose agentic capabili-
ties through task-specific adaptation. In specialized domains such as software engineering (SWE),
frameworks such as SWE-Agent (Yang et al., 2024b) and SE-Agent (Guo et al., 2025) deploy pro-
fessional tool functions and reuse interaction trajectories to construct evolving knowledge bases.
Despite these advances, most existing approaches still rely on the monotonic accumulation of raw
context, inevitably suffering from information dilution and attention degradation as the interaction
horizon expands (Li, 2023).
Agent Memory and Context Compression.
To support long-term reasoning, recent research
has increasingly focused on memory management and context compression, integrating retrieval-
augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2025) to integrate external knowledge.
For memory management, some agents (Park et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2024) utilize persistent
memory stores to simulate long-term interactions, while systems like MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023)
and LONGMEM (Wang et al., 2023) enhance LLMs with scalable, hierarchical memory architec-
tures. To directly mitigate sequence length, compression methods (Jiang et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2026) prune redundant information at the token level, whereas attention-based
approaches (Fang et al., 2025) optimize efficiency through importance-guided selection. Within
agent frameworks, most approaches (Kang et al., 2025) employ a tiny auxiliary LLM to dynam-
ically distill or truncate trajectories; others, like MEM1 (Zhou et al., 2025), coordinate between
memory selection and the active reasoning process. ContextBudget (Wu et al., 2026) formulates
context management as a budget-constrained sequential decision problem and learns when and how
to compress interaction history through reinforcement learning. Recent studies (Su et al., 2026; Ye
et al., 2025) have also proposed trajectory folding strategies to truncate growing contexts. However,
most of these approaches depend on external auxiliary modules or separate processing stages. It not
only introduces significant computational overhead, but fundamentally disconnects the compression
mechanism from primary agent’s active reasoning state.
3
METHODOLOGY
We propose Auto-Regressive State Machine (ARSM), a lightweight training-free architecture that
manages context through a repeated cycle of observation, reflection, state update, and action. Af-
ter receiving the outcome of a previously executed action, the agent generates a reflection on that
outcome, metadata for updating its memory, and a proposal for the next action. The controller uses
this metadata to update the structured state and applies the configured retention limits when assem-
bling subsequent context. Section 3.1 describes the output format and HAR records, Section 3.2
defines the memory components and their event-conditioned updates, and Section 3.3 explains how
the compression-control parameter adjusts memory capacities.
3


Preprint
3.1
AUTO-REGRESSIVE CHAIN-STRUCTURED TRAJECTORY ABSTRACTION
Auto-Regressive (AR) Self-Compressive Space
As shown in Figure 2, we define most models’
responses as a structured space Zt, which falls into three components: conclusions from the previous
turn, the direction for the next turn, and the specific action to be executed. Specifically, it is formatted
as explicit, structured metadata (e.g., progress reflections, status updates, pitfall extractions) auto-
regressively, aligned with its standard reasoning steps. Upon the completion of each reasoning
turn, the space Zt is structurally parsed as Zt 7→⟨τt, ut⟩, where τt represents the extracted causal
tuple with precise interaction details, such as reflections and next-turn aims, and ut ∈{0, 1}4×1
represents a discrete one-hot routing vector. By mapping the generated status updates into four
distinct operational branches (Ongoing, Milestone, Failure, Success), ut serves as a routing signal
to direct the transition mechanics within our state machine.
Micro Hypothesis–Action–Result (HAR) Chain
The traditional agent trajectory T mainly con-
tains three sequential parts: reasoning, action, and output. To strengthen the causal link in reasoning,
we separate the generated message and action of the assistant as a detailed sequence of interactions,
apart from reasoning:
Tt = {(Ri, Hi+1, Ai+1, Oi+1)}t−1
i=1
(1)
where Hypothesis & Aim (Hi) is derived from the forward-looking portion of the messages and
defines the objective for the next action; Action (Ai) represents the exact tool invocation command;
Raw Observation (Oi) contains the tool’s raw execution output, which is mostly redundant; and
Result & Reflection (Ri) is a concise distillation of Oi that provides insights for the next turn.
Specifically, the raw observation Oi frequently contains thousands of tokens of logs, which in-
evitably obscures the crucial causal links between past reasoning and future actions. To resolve this,
our framework compresses the raw trajectory into a highly sparsified HAR chain (see Figure 2):
τt = (Ht, At, Rt)
(2)
where such chain abstraction is designed to preserve the causal topology of the debugging process
while substantially reducing the agent from the token burden of raw environmental feedback.
AR
Evolution
State (t=1)
ARSM
System Prompt
Reasoning
Hypothesis
Action
Observation
User Prompt
Reasoning
State (t=2)
Observation
Model Output
Model Output
Results
HAR Micro-Chain
Hypothesis
Action
Next Chain
…
Figure 2: Workflow of trajectory abstraction. The agent performs in-situ compression: previous
raw observations are evaluated and distilled into concise results.
3.2
DYNAMIC STATE MACHINE
The core of our framework is a dynamic state machine that manages the continuous evolution of
the agent’s internal cognitive state. As illustrated in Figure 1, the system state St evolves through a
formal state evolution loop driven by the agent’s self-generated metadata:
St = ∆Zt(St−1) ∈Sn×1
(3)
where n is the number of heterogeneous internal state components, and ∆denotes the core tran-
sition operator of our dynamic state machine parameterized by the structured metadata space Zt.
Following this update, the newly generated state St with the raw observation is fed back into the
agentic model to guide the subsequent reasoning step.
Internal State Definition
In our settings, we define the system St as:
St = [ct, pt, wt, mt, at]T
(4)
4


Preprint
where its elements are defined as follows: (i) Control Layer (ct) acts as a global checklist for
macroscopic task decomposition and progress tracking; (ii) Constraint Layer (pt, wt) utilizes pitfall
memory (pt) to prevent redundant failures and loop alerts (wt) to intervene during circular reasoning;
(iii) Knowledge Layer (mt) stores high-level logical milestones that fold completed sub-tasks of
macro-chains into verified facts in order to free context; and (iv) Working Memory Layer (at)
maintains the active causal reasoning trajectory of the current micro-chain {τi} as compressed HAR
tuples, retaining immediate causal context without the overhead of raw logs.
State Transition Matrix
Operating alongside the execution loop, the state evolution is governed
by the core transition operator ∆. Directed by the previously parsed routing vector ut, the transition
acts as a gate to selectively activate the corresponding operational branch. The unified state transition
∆in Equation 3 is mathematically expanded as a matrix projection:
St = ∆Zt(St−1) =

T(τt) ⊛St−1

ut
(5)
where T(τt) ∈O5×4 is the transition operator matrix instantiated by the tuple τt, and ⊛denotes
the element-wise operator. It broadcasts the state vector St−1 into the operator matrix space, such
that each atomic operator is applied to its corresponding layer, generating a candidate state matrix.
Specifically, T(τt), constructed of atomic operators (detailed in Appendix A), is defined as:
T(τt) =


I
I
χ(·)
I
· ⊕τt
δ(·)
I
∅
· ∪ϕ(τt)
∅
I
· ∪ℓ(τt)
µ(·, τt)
I
π(·)
I
I
χ(·)
I
· ⊕τt


T
(6)
where I denotes the identity operator that maintains the previous state, and ∅denotes a selective
truncation operator that discards certain states before milestone τt while retaining recent activations.
Evolution t-1
<conclusion>
[REFLECTION]
[STATUS] ut
[PITFALL]
</conclusion>
<reasoning>
[CURRENT_STEP]
[AIM]
</reasoning>
Global Checklist
ct
Pitfall Memory
pt
Loop Alerts
wt 
Milestones
mt
Active Path
at = { τi }
u1  [ONGOING]
u2 [MILESTONE]
u3  [FAILURE]
u4  [SUCCESS]
Advance (δ)
Write (∪)
Check (χ)
Fold (ϕ)
Update (μ)
Check (χ)
Extend (⊕)
Fold (ϕ)
Prune (π)
Extend (⊕)
Write (∪)
Statet
Control Layer
Transition Matrix
Constraint Layer
Knowledge Layer Working Memory
Routing Signal
ut ∈ {0, 1}4×1
Figure 3: State transition mechanism. The model’s structured generation space is parsed to yield a
discrete routing signal ut, mapping to the branches. Targeted atomic operators are then dynamically
applied to update their respective layers, while unaffected subspaces remain frozen.
With the element-wise broadcasting of St−1 across the matrix, the gating vector ut activates a
specific evolutionary branch identified by the judgment block:
• Ongoing (u1 = 1): When the model continues to solve a sub-task without yet reaching
a definitive conclusion, control and constraint layers remain frozen (I), the active path
extends (⊕) with the latest interaction, and loop alerts are checked (χ);
• Milestone (u2 = 1): Upon resolving a sub-task, ARSM summarizes acquired knowledge
by first folding active paths (ϕ) into the knowledge layer and truncating them (∅), and then
advancing the checklist (δ) and clearing loop alerts (∅);
• Failure (u3 = 1): When encountering execution errors or dead ends, to penalize the flawed
trajectory and prevent the repetition of identical mistakes, the model extracts failure reasons
(ℓ) and updates loop alerts (µ). Invalid active path is then pruned (π) to its last verified node;
• Success (u4 = 1): It extends (⊕) with the confirmed result and performs a final loop alert
check (χ), marking a valid and successful execution.
Through these mechanisms, ARSM effectively mitigates context bloat and logical contamination,
thereby sustaining efficiency and consistency across complex, long-horizon reasoning tasks.
5


Preprint
3.3
SPARSIFIED CONTEXT MANAGEMENT
ARSM transforms the updated state St into a sparsified context window systematically partitioned
into three blocks: (i) Structured System State stores compressed context to ensure goal align-
ment without token bloat; (ii) Episodic Raw Trajectory retains recent high-fidelity interactions
for execution tracking; and (iii) Operational Directives provides explicit instructions to enforce
the mandated output schema. To dynamically regulate these block sizes while preserving reason-
ing continuity, we introduce a continuous compression-control parameter ρ ∈[0, 1]. The dynamic
window size W(ρ) for a given memory component is defined as:
W(ρ) =
(
Lmax
ρ = 0
max

Vmin, min

Lmax, Vmin +
j
(Vr −Vmin) · 1−ρ
ρ
m
ρ > 0
(7)
where Vr is the target capacity at ρ = 0.5, Vmin sets the minimum operational fidelity floor for the
component, Lmax denotes the global system context limit, and ⌊·⌉denotes rounding to the nearest
integer. More details are listed in Appendix B.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
DATASETS AND BASELINES
We evaluate ARSM on three datasets: WebShop (Yao et al., 2022), a simulated e-commerce web-
site environment with real-world products and crowd-sourced text instructions; Multi-Objective
Multi-Hop QA (Yang et al., 2018; Ho et al., 2020; Trivedi et al., 2022; Aksitov et al., 2023)
following MEM1 (Zhou et al., 2025); and SWE-Bench Lite (Jimenez et al., 2024), which com-
prises 300 GitHub repository issues. These settings cover software issue debugging, web nav-
igation, tool interaction, and multi-hop reasoning. We employ Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, Qwen2.5-
14B-Instruct (Team, 2024; Yang et al., 2024a), Qwen3.5-9B, Qwen3.5-27B (Qwen Team, 2026),
DeepSeek-V4.1-Flash (DeepSeek-AI, 2026), and GLM-5.3-Flash (GLM-5-Team et al., 2026) as
our backbone models. Detailed experimental settings and evaluation metrics are illustrated in Ap-
pendix C.1 and C.2.
4.2
COMPARED METHODS
We compare ARSM against several baselines: Search-R1 (Jin et al., 2025), SWE-Agent (Yang et al.,
2024b), SE-Agent (Guo et al., 2025), and Agent-FLAN (Chen et al., 2024) are reasoning-driven
methods; SWE-Pruner (Wang et al., 2026), MEM1 (Zhou et al., 2025), and ContextBudget (Wu
et al., 2026) are memory-aware methods for efficient reasoning.
Table 1: Comparison of training costs, structural dependencies, and generalizability across
methods. “◦” indicates that the generality requires task-specific training.
Method
Training-Free
Self-Contained
Plug-and-Play
Generality
Search-R1
× (RL)
✓
×
× (QA)
MEM1
× (RL)
× (RAG)
×
◦
ContextBudget
× (RL)
✓
×
◦
Agent-FLAN
× (SFT)
✓
×
◦
Mini SWE-Agent
✓
✓
✓
× (Code)
SE-Agent
✓
✓
✓
× (Code)
SWE-Pruner
✓
× (Auxiliary)
×
× (Code)
ARSM (Ours)
✓
✓
✓
✓
As summarized in Table 1, ARSM operates under a lightweight regime, whereas several baselines
rely on fine-tuning, reinforcement learning, retrieval augmentation, or auxiliary models, giving them
access to additional optimization or inference capacity. Since no prior method operates under ex-
actly the same regime as ARSM, we include them as comparative reference points, making the
comparison conservative for ARSM.
6


Preprint
4.3
MAIN RESULTS
In this section, we first examine whether ARSM improves the balance between task quality and
token usage in each evaluation setting. We report these outcomes jointly, since lower token usage
may accompany either improved performance or reduced accuracy. Section 4.4 then examines the
behavior of the memory controller, compares simplified configurations, and studies sensitivity to the
compression-control parameter.
WebShop
As shown in Table 2, ARSM improves task reward while substantially reducing token
consumption, not confined to a single backbone family: it appears on Qwen, DeepSeek, and GLM.
Table 2: Performance on WebShop.
Method
Reward ↑
Peak Token (k) ↓
Total Token (k) ↓
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
0.2858
5.41 ± 2.40
63.24
Agent-FLAN-7B (SFT)
0.2342
5.84 ± 1.61 (↑7.9%)
63.26 (↑0.03%)
MEM1-Webshop (Qwen, RAG+RL)
0.1528
1.55 ± 0.14 (↓71%)
21.82 (↓65%)
ARSM (Qwen-7B, ρ = 0.3)
0.4906
3.61 ± 0.87 (↓33%)
21.46 (↓66%)
ARSM (Qwen-7B, ρ = 0.5)
0.4641
3.01 ± 0.47 (↓44%)
23.11 (↓63%)
ARSM (Qwen-7B, ρ = 0.7)
0.4186
2.51 ± 0.23 (↓54%)
20.88 (↓67%)
Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct
0.4464
5.46 ± 4.23
45.34
ARSM (Qwen-14B, ρ = 0.3)
0.5881
3.84 ± 1.66 (↓30%)
24.05 (↓47%)
ARSM (Qwen-14B, ρ = 0.5)
0.5736
3.23 ± 1.05 (↓41%)
21.01 (↓54%)
ARSM (Qwen-14B, ρ = 0.7)
0.5582
2.70 ± 0.62 (↓51%)
20.77 (↓54%)
Deepseek-V4.1-Flash
0.6151
18.24
33.90
ARSM (Deepseek, ρ = 0.5)
0.6633
11.89 (↓35%)
20.04 (↓41%)
GLM-5.3-Flash
0.6441
28.53
37.15
ARSM (GLM, ρ = 0.5)
0.7025
11.33 (↓60%)
24.25 (↓35%)
Multi-Objective Multi-Hop QA (16-Objective)
As shown in Table 3, ARSM substantially im-
proves both ΣEM and ΣF1 (sums over 16 objectives) while maintaining compact context. Across
different compression-control parameters, ARSM consistently outperforms other methods.
Table 3: Performance on Multi-Objective Multi-Hop QA (16-Objective). N/R denotes results
that were not reported in the original work.
Method
ΣEM ↑
ΣF1 ↑
Peak Token (k) ↓
Total Token (k) ↓
Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct
0.567
0.703
3.84
N/R
Search-R1 (RL)
0.009
0.011
2.09 (↓46%)
N/R
MEM1-QA (14B, truncate)
0.44
0.50
1.19 (↓69%)
N/R
ContextBudget1(30B, w/o RL)
0.17
N/R
8.00 (↑108%)
N/R
ARSM (14B, ρ = 0.3)
1.85
2.15
0.78 (↓80%)
55.06
ARSM (14B, ρ = 0.5)
1.87
2.30
0.81 (↓79%)
54.09
ARSM (14B, ρ = 0.7)
2.01
2.34
0.79 (↓79%)
51.43
SWE-Bench Lite
As shown in Table 4, ARSM consistently establishes a controllable perfor-
mance, efficiency trade-off across different model scales. We also analyze the token consumption
and interaction turns in Figure 4, indicating reduced prompt payload and accelerated reasoning.
1ContextBudget reports only the context budget; therefore, we use it as its peak token usage.
2We were unable to complete the evaluation for SE-Agent; its complex system prompts and tool-calling
requirements overwhelmed the models, consistently resulting in format errors or empty patches.
7


Preprint
Table 4: Performance on SWE-Bench Lite.
Method
Qwen3.5-9B
Qwen3.5-27B
Pass@1 ↑
Pass@5 ↑
Token (M) ↓
Pass@1 ↑
Token (M) ↓
Mini SWE-Agent
26.6%
47.5%
6.57
51.7%
1.74
SE-Agent2(Evolution)
15.0%
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
SWE-Pruner (Auxiliary)
40.7%
58.7%
2.29 (↓65%)
45.0%
2.37 (↑36%)
ARSM (ρ = 0.1)
29.7%
46.67%
2.40 (↓63%)
46.5%
0.92 (↓47%)
ARSM (ρ = 0.5)
26.2%
44.5%
2.05 (↓69%)
46.0%
0.84 (↓52%)
ARSM (ρ = 0.9)
20.3%
53.3%
1.15 (↓82%)
38.0%
0.47 (↓73%)
Figure 4: Efficiency analysis on SWE-Bench Lite using Qwen3.5-27B. It illustrates the distri-
bution of tokens and interaction turns. Our ARSM (ρ = 0.5) consistently shifts the distribution
towards the left, demonstrating higher efficiency compared to baselines.
4.4
ABLATION STUDIES
Compression Control
To investigate the sensitivity of our core mechanism, we conduct an ab-
lation study on the compression-control parameter ρ. Figure 5 shows that ρ governs the trade-off
between the retention of contextual details and the aggressiveness of token pruning.
Figure 5: Performance and efficiency comparison across different ARSM compression-control
parameter (ρ) and baselines using Qwen3.5-27B. ARSM drastically reduces prompt token usage
compared to SWE-Agent and SWE-Pruner across all evaluated compression rates.
Routing Behavior Analysis.
As shown in Table 5, the routing behavior of ARSM (ρ = 0.5) in-
dicates that it actively invokes milestone consolidation, failure handling, and completion transitions
rather than collapsing into an append-only running memory.
Trajectory Summarization and State Machine Evolution
We compare ARSM with several sim-
plified variants on Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, as shown in Table 6. Structured summary compresses
aggressively but suffers substantial performance degradation. HAR-only mostly improves task per-
8


Preprint
Table 5: Distribution of routing signals on SWE-Bench Lite, Qwen3.5-9B.
Routing Signal
ONGOING
MILESTONE
FAILURE
SUCCESS
Percentage (%)
76.34
8.99
9.17
5.50
formance, while SM-only mainly reduces memory cost with limited performance change. Com-
bining both yields the strongest performance–efficiency trade-off. More details are provided in
Appendix C.4.
Table 6: Trajectory summarization and state machine (SM) evolution on 200 Webshop in-
stances. It highlights the complementary roles of HAR abstraction and dynamic state evolution in
balancing task performance and token efficiency.
Method
HAR
SM
Reward ↑
Peak Tokens (k) ↓
Total Tokens (k) ↓
Plain Summary
×
×
0.3305
3.63 ± 0.84
44.71
Structured Summary
×
×
0.1321
1.37 ± 0.10
18.44
HAR-only
✓
×
0.4240
3.18 ± 1.86
28.92
SM-only
×
✓
0.3178
2.74 ± 0.23
24.18
ARSM (ρ = 0.5)
✓
✓
0.4899
2.97 ± 0.45
22.84
Trajectory-Level Evaluation.
We evaluate ARSM (ρ = 0.5) using an LLM-based evaluator. As
Table 7 shows, ARSM preserves factual fidelity and decisive information while maintaining routing
and trajectory coherence. Details are provided in Appendix C.4.
Table 7:
Trajectory-level evaluation of ARSM state updates and routing decisions on 100
WebShop trajectories with ρ = 0.5. Higher scores indicate better performance.
Metric
Score ↑
Interpretation
State Fidelity
76.1%
Factual faithfulness of compressed states
State Sufficiency
81.4%
Retention of information needed later
Routing Correctness
73.2%
Correctness of routing signals
Trajectory Coherence
72.5%
Global consistency across the trajectory
More Experiments.
We also conduct the following studies, and those details are provided in
Appendix C.3, D, and E.
• Efficiency and compression-control analysis on Qwen3.5-9B, SWE-Bench Lite. ARSM
reduces token and turn costs, while ρ controls the retention–compression trade-off.
• Solved-set overlap. We examine solved instances across different ρ settings, revealing a
stable solving core and complementary coverage across compression regimes.
• State representation analysis. We illustrate the two complementary memory surfaces of
ARSM: recent raw interaction memory and compressed internal state, showing how they
respectively preserve local interaction fidelity and long-range reasoning continuity.
• Compression-control parameter case study. Using the same instance under different ρ
settings, we qualitatively examine how increasing compression shifts task-relevant infor-
mation from transcript-level raw interaction history toward structured internal state.
5
CONCLUSION
In this work, we identify monotonic accumulation of raw context as a fundamental bottleneck for
LLM-based agents in interleaved reasoning. To overcome the resulting attention sink and computa-
tional bloat, we introduce the Auto-Regressive State Machine (ARSM), a lightweight, self-contained
9


Preprint
framework for in-situ context compression. By abstracting raw interactions into Hypothesis-Action-
Result (HAR) micro-chains and orchestrating them through a dynamic state machine, ARSM shifts
the agentic paradigm from passive log accumulation to structured state evolution.
Our systematic evaluation across WebShop, Multi-Objective Multi-Hop QA, and SWE-Bench Lite
demonstrates that ARSM can substantially reduce context and token costs while improving strong
long-horizon reasoning performance in most evaluated settings. Crucially, these efficiency gains are
obtained without training or auxiliary compression models, relying instead on the backbone model’s
intrinsic reasoning and summarization capabilities. Furthermore, by formalizing a compression-
control parameter, ARSM provides a tunable mechanism to regulate the context, empowering en-
gineers to explicitly balance operational fidelity against inference cost based on task demands and
model capacities.
Overall, our findings suggest that structured state evolution is a promising alternative to continuously
expanding interaction histories for long-horizon agents. By autonomously distilling, folding, and
pruning working memory, ARSM provides a scalable and cost-effective foundation for deploying
next-generation autonomous agents in complex environments and beyond.
REFERENCES
Renat Aksitov, Sobhan Miryoosefi, Zonglin Li, Daliang Li, Sheila Babayan, Kavya Kopparapu,
Zachary Fisher, Ruiqi Guo, Sushant Prakash, Pranesh Srinivasan, Manzil Zaheer, Felix Yu, and
Sanjiv Kumar. Rest meets react: Self-improvement for multi-step reasoning llm agent, 2023.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10003.
Zehui Chen, Kuikun Liu, Qiuchen Wang, Wenwei Zhang, Jiangning Liu, Dahua Lin, Kai Chen, and
Feng Zhao. Agent-flan: Designing data and methods of effective agent tuning for large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12881, 2024.
DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-v4.1-flash: Pushing the limits of kv cache compression, 2026.
Yixiong Fang, Tianran Sun, Yuling Shi, and Xiaodong Gu. Attentionrag: Attention-guided context
pruning in retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10720, 2025.
GLM-5-Team, :, Aohan Zeng, Xin Lv, Zhenyu Hou, Zhengxiao Du, Qinkai Zheng, Bin Chen,
Da Yin, Chendi Ge, Chenghua Huang, Chengxing Xie, Chenzheng Zhu, Congfeng Yin, Cunxiang
Wang, Gengzheng Pan, Hao Zeng, Haoke Zhang, Haoran Wang, Huilong Chen, Jiajie Zhang, Jian
Jiao, Jiaqi Guo, Jingsen Wang, Jingzhao Du, Jinzhu Wu, Kedong Wang, Lei Li, Lin Fan, Lucen
Zhong, Mingdao Liu, Mingming Zhao, Pengfan Du, Qian Dong, Rui Lu, Shuang-Li, Shulin Cao,
Song Liu, Ting Jiang, Xiaodong Chen, Xiaohan Zhang, Xuancheng Huang, Xuezhen Dong, Yabo
Xu, Yao Wei, Yifan An, Yilin Niu, Yitong Zhu, Yuanhao Wen, Yukuo Cen, Yushi Bai, Zhongpei
Qiao, Zihan Wang, Zikang Wang, Zilin Zhu, Ziqiang Liu, Zixuan Li, Bojie Wang, Bosi Wen, Can
Huang, Changpeng Cai, Chao Yu, Chen Li, Chengwei Hu, Chenhui Zhang, Dan Zhang, Daoyan
Lin, Dayong Yang, Di Wang, Ding Ai, Erle Zhu, Fangzhou Yi, Feiyu Chen, Guohong Wen, Hai-
long Sun, Haisha Zhao, Haiyi Hu, Hanchen Zhang, Hanrui Liu, Hanyu Zhang, Hao Peng, Hao
Tai, Haobo Zhang, He Liu, Hongwei Wang, Hongxi Yan, Hongyu Ge, Huan Liu, Huanpeng Chu,
Jia’ni Zhao, Jiachen Wang, Jiajing Zhao, Jiamin Ren, Jiapeng Wang, Jiaxin Zhang, Jiayi Gui,
Jiayue Zhao, Jijie Li, Jing An, Jing Li, Jingwei Yuan, Jinhua Du, Jinxin Liu, Junkai Zhi, Junwen
Duan, Kaiyue Zhou, Kangjian Wei, Ke Wang, Keyun Luo, Laiqiang Zhang, Leigang Sha, Liang
Xu, Lindong Wu, Lintao Ding, Lu Chen, Minghao Li, Nianyi Lin, Pan Ta, Qiang Zou, Rongjun
Song, Ruiqi Yang, Shangqing Tu, Shangtong Yang, Shaoxiang Wu, Shengyan Zhang, Shijie Li,
Shuang Li, Shuyi Fan, Wei Qin, Wei Tian, Weining Zhang, Wenbo Yu, Wenjie Liang, Xiang
Kuang, Xiangmeng Cheng, Xiangyang Li, Xiaoquan Yan, Xiaowei Hu, Xiaoying Ling, Xing Fan,
Xingye Xia, Xinyuan Zhang, Xinze Zhang, Xirui Pan, Xu Zou, Xunkai Zhang, Yadi Liu, Yan-
dong Wu, Yanfu Li, Yidong Wang, Yifan Zhu, Yijun Tan, Yilin Zhou, Yiming Pan, Ying Zhang,
Yinpei Su, Yipeng Geng, Yong Yan, Yonglin Tan, Yuean Bi, Yuhan Shen, Yuhao Yang, Yujiang
Li, Yunan Liu, Yunqing Wang, Yuntao Li, Yurong Wu, Yutao Zhang, Yuxi Duan, Yuxuan Zhang,
Zezhen Liu, Zhengtao Jiang, Zhenhe Yan, Zheyu Zhang, Zhixiang Wei, Zhuo Chen, Zhuoer Feng,
Zijun Yao, Ziwei Chai, Ziyuan Wang, Zuzhou Zhang, Bin Xu, Minlie Huang, Hongning Wang,
Juanzi Li, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. Glm-5: from vibe coding to agentic engineering, 2026.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15763.
10


Preprint
Yifu Guo, Jiaye Lin, Huacan Wang, Yuzhen Han, Sen Hu, Ziyi Ni, Licheng Wang, and Mingguang
Chen. Se-agent: Self-evolution trajectory optimization in multi-step reasoning with llm-based
agents. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. Constructing a multi-
hop QA dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 6609–6625, Barcelona, Spain (On-
line), December 2020. International Committee on Computational Linguistics. URL https:
//www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.coling-main.580.
Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. Llmlingua: Compressing
prompts for accelerated inference of large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 confer-
ence on empirical methods in natural language processing, pp. 13358–13376, 2023.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R
Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and
Jiawei Han. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516, 2025.
Minki Kang, Wei-Ning Chen, Dongge Han, Huseyin A Inan, Lukas Wutschitz, Yanzhi Chen, Robert
Sim, and Saravan Rajmohan. Acon: Optimizing context compression for long-horizon llm agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00615, 2025.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
Heinrich K¨uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rockt¨aschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented gener-
ation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
9459–9474, 2020.
Yucheng Li. Unlocking context constraints of llms: Enhancing context efficiency of llms with self-
information-based content filtering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12102, 2023.
Yucheng Li, Bo Dong, Frank Guerin, and Chenghua Lin. Compressing context to enhance inference
efficiency of large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods
in natural language processing, pp. 6342–6353, 2023.
Jinghao Luo, Yuchen Tian, Chuxue Cao, Ziyang Luo, Hongzhan Lin, Kaixin Li, Chuyi Kong,
Ruichao Yang, and Jing Ma.
From storage to experience: A survey on the evolution of llm
agent memory mechanisms. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
2026, pp. 41622–41652, 2026.
Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E
Gonzalez. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings
of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology, pp. 1–22, 2023.
Qwen Team. Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents, February 2026. URL https://qwen.
ai/blog?id=qwen3.5.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dess`ı, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can
teach themselves to use tools. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:68539–
68551, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 36:8634–8652, 2023.
11


Preprint
Jin Su, Runnan Fang, Yeqiu Li, Xiaobin Wang, Shihao Cai, Pengjun Xie, Ningyu Zhang, and Fajie
Yuan.
U-fold: Dynamic intent-aware context folding for user-centric agents.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.18285, 2026.
Qwen Team. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models, September 2024. URL https://qwenlm.
github.io/blog/qwen2.5/.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. MuSiQue: Multi-
hop questions via single-hop question composition. Transactions of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 2022.
Weizhi Wang, Li Dong, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Xifeng Yan, Jianfeng Gao, and Furu Wei. Aug-
menting language models with long-term memory. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36:74530–74543, 2023.
Yuhang Wang, Yuling Shi, Mo Yang, Rongrui Zhang, Shilin He, Heng Lian, Yuting Chen, Siyu Ye,
Kai Cai, and Xiaodong Gu. Swe-pruner: Self-adaptive context pruning for coding agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2601.16746, 2026.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Yong Wu, YanZhao Zheng, TianZe Xu, ZhenTao Zhang, YuanQiang Yu, JiHuai Zhu, Chao Ma,
BinBin Lin, BaoHua Dong, HangCheng Zhu, RuoHui Huang, and Gang Yu.
Contextbud-
get: Budget-aware context management for long-horizon search agents, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2604.01664.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Guanting Dong, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang,
Jialin Wang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Ma, Jin Xu, Jingren Zhou, Jinze Bai,
Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Chen, Kexin Yang, Mei Li, Mingfeng
Xue, Na Ni, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Ru Peng, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Runji Lin, Shijie Wang, Shuai
Bai, Sinan Tan, Tianhang Zhu, Tianhao Li, Tianyu Liu, Wenbin Ge, Xiaodong Deng, Xiaohuan
Zhou, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Zhang, Xipin Wei, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Yao, Yichang
Zhang, Yu Wan, Yunfei Chu, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zhihao Fan. Qwen2
technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10671, 2024a.
John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652, 2024b.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
and Christopher D. Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
answering, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.09600.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan.
Webshop: Towards scalable
real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. In ArXiv, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Rui Ye, Zhongwang Zhang, Kuan Li, Huifeng Yin, Zhengwei Tao, Yida Zhao, Liangcai Su, Liwen
Zhang, Zile Qiao, Xinyu Wang, et al. Agentfold: Long-horizon web agents with proactive context
management. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24699, 2025.
Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. Memorybank: Enhancing large
language models with long-term memory. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence, 2024.
Zijian Zhou, Ao Qu, Zhaoxuan Wu, Sunghwan Kim, Alok Prakash, Daniela Rus, Jinhua Zhao,
Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Paul Pu Liang. Mem1: Learning to synergize memory and reasoning
for efficient long-horizon agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.15841.
12


Preprint
A
ATOMIC OPERATOR DEFINITION
To rigorously formalize the internal mechanics of our state machine, we need to establish the seman-
tic definitions of its foundational building blocks. These atomic operators dynamically manipulate
different memory subspaces of the system state S and subsequently construct the global transition
matrix:
Advancement Operator [δ : C →C].
It manages the macroscopic task progression during the
milestone state. Upon the success of a milestone, δ pops the completed sub-task c(0) from the head
of the checklist queue c, formally defined as:
δ(c) = c \ {c(0)}
(8)
Folding Operator [ϕ : A →M].
As a cognitive compression mechanism triggered during a
milestone, it projects a high-dimensional reasoning trajectory, i.e., the active path a, into a condensed
semantic knowledge representation:
ϕ(a) = Fcomp


|a|
M
i=1
τi


(9)
where Fcomp denotes the auto-regressive abstraction function that semantically synthesizes the se-
quential HAR tuples. To preserve short-term context and ensure reasoning continuity, the folding
operation selectively retains the most recent HAR micro-chains within the active memory rather
than compressing the entire trajectory.
Extraction Operator [ℓ: T →P].
Upon entering a failure state, the framework first initiates a
distillation stage to convert raw error data into actionable knowledge. The extraction operator ℓ(τt)
auto-regressively analyzes the rejected tuple τt to deduce the underlying technical cause.
Instead of merely recording the error, it generates a concise instructional synthesis besides the
model-generated pitfall memory p.
For instance, rather than appending raw traceback logs, it
produces a high-level heuristic: "Avoid repeatedly reading the same directory;
pivot to test-case analysis to verify current assumptions." This en-
sures that the essence of the failure is preserved in a format that directly informs future decision-
making.
Update Operator [µ : W × T →W].
The system will perform loop monitoring to identify and
penalize repetitive, flawed behaviors. The update operator µ dynamically increments a loop weight
wt based on the similarity between the current failure and historical trajectory nodes:
µ(wt−1, τt) = wt−1 + γ · 1sim(τt, wt−1)
(10)
where γ denotes the penalty increment and 1sim is an indicator function. When a repeat failure is de-
tected (1sim = 1), the framework merges redundant logs into a compact count-based representation
(e.g., "Action [Action] failed N times"). Once wt exceeds a predefined threshold,
the system triggers a structural intervention—such as dynamic prompt switching or hard gating—to
forcefully steer the agent away from local minima and toward an alternative reasoning trajectory.
Pruning Operator [π : A →A].
The system will implement context sanitation to physically
reset the reasoning environment when the model is trapped in the failure loop. To prevent invalid or
contaminated reasoning chains from bloating the context window and misleading future steps, the
pruning operator π executes a defensive rollback on the active path sequence a = (τ1, . . . , τk):
π(a) = (τ1, . . . , τk−η)
(11)
where η ≥1 represents the rollback depth to the last verified stable node. Unlike simple truncation,
this operation is strategically coupled with the insights from ℓand µ; the agent resumes from a clean
state but carries the newly distilled pitfall memory, ensuring that the subsequent exploration does
not replicate the previously pruned logic branches.
13


Preprint
Check Operator [χ : W →{SAFE, WARN}].
It acts as an outer observer for routine monitoring
evaluation, verifying the current reasoning trajectory against the loop alerts w to proactively monitor
for loop behaviors. It can be formulated as a thresholding function:
χ(w) =
WARN,
if ∃ω ∈w s.t. ω ≥θloop
SAFE,
else
(12)
where θloop represents the maximum tolerable threshold for repetitive behaviors.
B
COMPRESSION-CONTROL PARAMETER
Equation 7 uses the scaling factor
s(ρ) = 1 −ρ
ρ
,
(13)
for ρ > 0, while ρ = 0 is treated separately as the maximum-retention setting, where the capacity
is capped only by Lmax. Thus, smaller ρ values preserve more historical context, whereas larger ρ
values impose more aggressive compression.
At ρ = 0.5, s(ρ) = 1, so the corresponding capacity equals the reference capacity Vr before
applying the global upper bound. At ρ = 1, s(ρ) = 0, and each controlled component reaches its
predefined minimum capacity Vmin.
More concretely, ρ jointly controls the capacities of the structured system state and the episodic raw
trajectory, while operational directives remain fixed. The controlled quantities include:
• Recent Raw turn Window: the number of most recent complete turns retained in raw
form.
• Recent Raw Assistant Window: the number of recent assistant turns whose original action
text is preserved.
• Recent Raw Unclipped Window: the number of latest turns for which observations are
preserved with looser clipping.
• Active Reasoning Path Window: the maximum number of reasoning-path records re-
tained in the active state.
• Post-Milestone Active Path Window: the tighter cap applied to the active reasoning path
after a MILESTONE fold.
• Pitfall Window: the number of retained failure-derived lessons.
• Milestone Window: the number of verified logical milestones retained in compressed
state.
• Online Context Entry Budget: the maximum number of compressed state entries exposed
to the online controller.
• Output Clipping Budgets: character-level caps for different observation types, including:
– general latest output budget,
– test/traceback budget,
– diff budget,
– source/read/view/search budget,
– other output budget.
Each controlled quantity has its own (Vr, Vmin) configuration. Therefore, a single compression-
control parameter ρ consistently adjusts raw-history retention, structured-state capacity, and obser-
vation fidelity, providing a continuous trade-off between context preservation and compression.
14


Preprint
C
EXPERIMENTS
C.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Framework Implementation and Configuration.
To ensure reproducibility, all experimental
parameters are standardized via YAML configuration files. For WebShop, we evaluate Qwen2.5-
14B-Instruct over 1,000 episodes with temperature = 0, a limit of 20 environment steps and 30
model calls per task, and at most 1,024 generated tokens per call. For 7B models, We evaluate with
the same limits and 8,192 token context window. The baseline and corresponding ARSM model on
Deepseek-V4.1-Flash and GLM-5.3-Flash are accessed directly through third-party APIs. For the
16-Objective Multi-Hop QA, we assess Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct across 300 instances under zero-
temperature setting and 1,024-token budget, permitting up to 20 interaction turns alongside an E5
retriever that fetches the top-3 passages per query. For SWE-Bench Lite, to accommodate lengthy
reasoning traces, we expand the context horizon for Qwen3.5-9B and Qwen3.5-27B to at most 300
agent steps and 8,192 tokens per call with a sampling temperature of 0.6.
Computational Resources.
Our experiments and development were conducted on two primary
clusters: one equipped with eight NVIDIA H200 GPUs and another with four NVIDIA RTX A6000
GPUs. Most models were served through vLLM.
C.2
EVALUATION METRICS
To evaluate the performance and efficiency of ARSM and the baseline models, we employ different
metrics:
• For Webshop, we measure average final reward and token usage.
• For Multi-Hop QA, we measure exact matching (EM), F1, and token usage.
• For SWE-Bench Lite, we evaluate the models using Pass@1 and Pass@5 and token usage.
These metrics collectively provide a general view of the model’s capability, and they are defined as:
Token Usage.
To assess the computational cost and resource efficiency, we track the total number
of tokens consumed during the entire inference process. It contains both the prompt tokens and the
completion tokens. Lower token usage indicates higher inference efficiency and reduced API costs.
We also measure peak token usage, the maximum context window size reached at any single point
during the model’s reasoning or generation process.
WebShop Reward.
The WebShop reward measures how well the purchased product satisfies the
user’s shopping instruction. It considers the product attributes, purchase options, price constraint,
and product type:
R = rtype
Nattr + Noption + Iprice
N ∗
attr + N ∗
option + 1
,
(14)
where Nattr and Noption are the numbers of matched attributes and options, respectively, and
Iprice = 1 if the product satisfies the price constraint and 0 otherwise. The coefficient rtype mea-
sures whether the selected product has the correct product type. The final reward ranges from [0, 1],
and R = 1 indicates that all requirements are satisfied.
Exact Match (EM), F1 Score, and Multi-Objective Score.
For each objective in Multi-Objective
Multi-Hop QA, Exact Match (EM) measures whether the generated prediction exactly matches the
ground-truth answer, while the F1 score measures token-level overlap between the prediction and
the reference answer:
F1 = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
.
(15)
Following the 16-objective Multi-Hop QA setting, we evaluate each instance over 16 objectives. We
report the aggregated score as the sum of the scores across all objectives:
Score =
16
X
i=1
si ∈[0, 16],
(16)
15


Preprint
where si denotes the score for the i-th objective.
Pass@k.
It measures the functional correctness of the generated solutions. We generate n samples
for each task (n ≥k) and count the number of correct samples c. The unbiased estimator for Pass@k
is defined as:
Pass@k = EProblems
"
1 −
 n−c
k

 n
k

#
(17)
In our experiments on SWE-Bench Lite, we report the success rate using k = 1 and k = 5. These
metrics respectively reflect the model’s efficiency in surfacing internal knowledge and the actual
expansion of its underlying capability frontier.
C.3
MORE EXPERIMENTS
Efficiency Distribution on Qwen3.5-9B.
To provide a comprehensive understanding of our
method’s generalization ability, we present additional experimental results focusing on the smaller
backbone model, Qwen3.5-9B. Figure 6 illustrates the detailed distribution of computational costs
across four dimensions: prompt tokens, completion tokens, total tokens, and interaction turns.
Figure 6: Efficiency analysis on SWE-Bench Lite using Qwen3.5-9B.
Similar to the trends observed with the larger model, the kernel density estimation curves for ARSM
(ρ = 0.5) exhibit a pronounced leftward shift compared to both SWE-Agent and SWE-Pruner.
Notably, the distributions for interaction turns and prompt tokens are highly concentrated in the
lower-cost regions. This indicates that even with a weaker reasoning backbone, our state com-
pression mechanism consistently prevents context over-accumulation and guides the agent to reach
the correct patch in fewer exploration steps, thereby avoiding the long-tail inefficiency prevalent in
standard autonomous agents.
However, a residual long tail in interaction turns remains. We attribute this primarily to the inherent
instruction-following limitations of smaller models; specifically, the 9B model occasionally strug-
gles to reliably generate the structured summarizations (e.g., reflections, pitfalls, and aims) required
by our prompts, necessitating additional recovery turns.
Impact of Compression-Control Parameter on Qwen3.5-9B.
As shown in Figure 7, baseline
SWE-Agent consumes about 7.0M tokens, which severely limits its practical deployment. In stark
contrast, ARSM introduces a massive reduction in prompt token usage across all evaluated com-
pression rates, keeping the payload strictly under 3.0M tokens. As ρ increases (indicating more
aggressive compression), the prompt token cost monotonically decreases.
Crucially, this substantial cost reduction does not lead to a catastrophic collapse in performance.
While extremely aggressive compression (e.g., ρ = 0.9) inevitably discards some necessary con-
text and causes a drop in the success rate, intermediate values successfully maintain a competitive
success rate, showing that ARSM provides a highly effective and tunable trade-off space.
Effect of ρ on Solved-Set Overlap.
We analyze the exact overlap of instances solved by ARSM
under different ρ settings for both Qwen3.5-9B and Qwen3.5-27B, as shown in Figure 8&9.
Across model scales, ARSM exhibits a clear stable core: 25 instances are solved by all evaluated
ρ settings on Qwen3.5-9B, and 48 instances are solved by all 11 ρ settings on Qwen3.5-27B. The
16


Preprint
Figure 7: Performance and efficiency comparison across different compression-control parameters
(ρ) and baselines using Qwen3.5-9B.
largest intersections are dominated by fully stable or near-stable solutions, where only a small num-
ber of ρ values fail to solve the instance. At the same time, both models show a non-trivial long tail
of rare intersection patterns, indicating that varying ρ also expands coverage by enabling ARSM to
solve additional instances beyond the stable core.
Figure 8: Intersections of resolved SWE-Bench Lite instances on Qwen3.5-9B model.
Overall, these results show that ARSM has a strong shared solving capability across ρ settings, while
the variation in ρ further broadens its coverage through complementary exploration.
Table 8: Solved-set overlap of ARSM across different ρ settings.
Model
Union Solved
Solved by All ρ
Long-Tail Coverage
Qwen3.5-9B
142
25
48 cases / 18 patterns
Qwen3.5-27B
190
48
94 cases / 90 patterns
17


Preprint
Figure 9: Intersections of resolved SWE-Bench Lite instances on Qwen3.5-27B model.
C.4
EXPERIMENT PROTOCOL
Evaluation Protocol of Trajectory Summarization and State Machine Evolution.
We evaluate
five variants to examine the effects of trajectory summarization and state machine evolution:
• Plain Summary repeatedly rewrites the interaction history as a single free-form summary.
• Structured Summary rewrites a single summary with fixed fields for the goal, progress,
important observations, failures, and next action.
• HAR-only accumulates hypothesis–action–result records in chronological order. When the
context budget is reached, it removes the oldest complete records.
• SM-only retains the dynamic state machine, including its checklist, candidate ledger, pit-
falls, milestones, active path, routing signals, and state transitions. It uses generic structured
turn summaries instead of HAR records.
• Full ARSM combines HAR records with the dynamic state machine.
Trajectory-Level Evaluation Protocol.
To evaluate the quality of ARSM’s compressed state and
routing decisions, we conduct a trajectory-level analysis on 100 WebShop trajectories generated
with ρ = 0.5. We use DeepSeek-V4.1-Flash (DeepSeek-AI, 2026) as the LLM-based evaluator. For
each trajectory, the evaluator assesses every interaction turn independently under four criteria: state
fidelity, state sufficiency, routing correctness, and trajectory coherence,
s(m)
j,t ∈{0, 1},
(18)
where j indexes the trajectory, t indexes the interaction turn, and m denotes the evaluation metric.
A score of 1 indicates that the turn satisfies the corresponding criterion, while 0 indicates otherwise.
We first compute the average score within each trajectory:
¯s(m)
j
= 1
Tj
Tj
X
t=1
s(m)
j,t ,
(19)
where Tj is the number of turns in trajectory j. We then report the final metric by averaging the
trajectory-level scores over all 100 trajectories:
S(m) =
1
100
100
X
j=1
¯s(m)
j
.
(20)
18


Preprint
The resulting value is reported as a percentage in Table 7. This two-stage aggregation gives equal
weight to each trajectory, rather than allowing longer trajectories with more turns to dominate the
final score.
D
ILLUSTRATION OF STATE REPRESENTATION
We illustrate what ARSM actually stores in its two main memory surfaces. Using the instance
django django-16408 as a running example, we show how local reasoning traces are repre-
sented in (i) recent raw interaction memory, and (ii) compressed internal state.
D.1
RECENT RAW INTERACTION MEMORY
Recent raw memory preserves a bounded portion of the original interaction trajectory in a near-
transcript form. Each preserved segment typically contains four elements: Hypothesis, Action,
Observation and Result.
In our implementation, this memory surface is formatted as a lightweight HAR chain record. A
representative example from django django-16408 (ρ = 0.5, Turn 20) is shown below:
ARSM Trajectory Example
<conclusion>
[REFLECTION] Where: Reading query_utils.py Result: The output was
truncated, showing only line numbers and summaries. The test
failure shows that when using FilteredRelation with
select_related, the wrong related object is returned (PoolStyle
instead of Tournament). Conclusion: Need to see the full
FilteredRelation class implementation to understand the bug.
[STATUS] ONGOING
[PITFALL] N/A
</conclusion>
<reasoning type=\"CONTINUE\">
[CURRENT_STEP] Understand current logic
[AIM] Read the full FilteredRelation class implementation from
query_utils.py
</reasoning>
<mswea_bash_command>
\ngrep -n \"class FilteredRelation\" /testbed/django/db/models/
query_utils.py
</mswea_bash_command>
This representation is intentionally close to the original interaction trace. It is useful for preserving
local procedural detail, especially when the model may still need to reuse exact command outcomes,
recently opened file fragments, or immediate debugging evidence.
D.2
COMPRESSED INTERNAL STATE
In contrast, the compressed internal state is not a transcript replay. Instead, it reorganizes the trajec-
tory into a structured summary that retains reasoning continuity while discarding low-value interac-
tion redundancy.
A representative internal-state excerpt for django django-16408 (ρ = 0.5, Turn 50) is shown
below:
ARSM Internal State Example
[Internal State Update]
# Global Checklist
19


Preprint
[x] 1. Exploring the codebase structure to understand the issue
[ ] 2. Understand current logic
[ ] 3. Identify root cause
[ ] 4. Patch the source
[ ] 5. Verify / submit
# Pitfall
- Need to use Django’s test infrastructure instead of direct Python
imports.
- Django test runner location needs to be discovered.
- Django needs to be installed in development mode from the testbed
directory before running tests.
...
# Milestones
- No verified milestones yet.
# Loop Alerts
- Inspect loop warning: the current step is repeatedly reading the
same file/path set 3 times without new evidence. Stop inspecting
this target; if a patch exists inspect ‘git diff -- .‘ and
submit with ‘echo COMPLETE_TASK_AND_SUBMIT_FINAL_OUTPUT‘,
otherwise edit the target or mark FAILURE and pivot.
- Execution guard active: repeated looping has blocked this command
path. You must change the step, file target, or action type.
...
# Active Reasoning Path
- Turn 1: [Hypothesis] Find the relevant files for FilteredRelation
and the test case [Action] find /testbed -type f -name \"*.py\"
| xargs grep -l \"FilteredRelation\" | head -20 </mscontent> [
Reflection] /testbed/django/db/models/query.py /testbed/django/
db/models/query_utils.py /testbed/django/db/models/sql/query.py
/testbed/django/db/models/__init__.py /testbed/tests/
filtered_relation/tests.py /testbed/tests/
select_related_onetoone/tests.py /testbed/tests/queryset_pickle/
tests.py /testbed/tests/known_related_objects/tests.py bash: -c:
line 2: syntax error\u2026. Found relevant files containing
FilteredRelation. Need to examine the test file to understand
the issue context.
- Turn 2: [Hypothesis] Read the known_related_objects/tests.py file
to understand the test and models [Action] cat /testbed/tests/
known_related_objects/tests.py [Reflection] from django.db.
models import FilteredRelation from django.test import TestCase
from .models import Organiser, Pool, PoolStyle, Tournament class
ExistingRelatedInstancesTests(TestCase): @classmethod def
setUpTestData(cls): cls.t1 = Tournament.objects.create(name=\"
Tourney 1\") cls.t2 = Tournament.objects.create(name=\"Tourney
2\") cls.o1 = Organiser.objects.crea\u2026. Found the test file.
Need to see the full content including the test case that’s
failing and the models.
...
Compared with recent raw memory, this format is more abstract. It no longer stores each interaction
as a full transcript fragment. Instead, it preserves the causal reasoning trace in a compressed form
that is easier to carry across long horizons.
D.3
INTERPRETATION
The distinction between these two memory surfaces is central to ARSM.
20


Preprint
Recent raw memory preserves interaction fidelity: it keeps the model close to the original tool-use
trace and therefore supports short-horizon procedural reuse. Compressed internal state preserves
reasoning continuity: it extracts stable conclusions, reusable pitfall lessons, and active hypotheses
from that trace, making them available even when the original interaction history has been pruned.
This distinction between structured system state and episodic raw trajectory becomes especially im-
portant when the compression-control parameter ρ changes. As ρ increases, ARSM does not merely
reduce the amount of remembered history; it shifts a larger fraction of task-relevant continuity from
transcript-like raw replay into structured internal state. This effect is examined next in our trajectory
comparison case study.
E
CASE STUDY: TRAJECTORY COMPARISON UNDER DIFFERENT
COMPRESSION-CONTROL PARAMETER
To provide a concrete illustration of how ARSM changes the organization of reasoning
history under different compression settings, we present an instance-level case study on
django django-16408. We compare the same task under three compression-control parame-
ters: ρ = 0.2, ρ = 0.5, and ρ = 0.8.
E.1
TRAJECTORY STATISTICS
Table 9 summarizes the overall trajectory lengths. The same task produces substantially different
rollout lengths under different compression regimes: the moderate setting ρ = 0.5 leads to the
longest trajectory, while ρ = 0.2 and ρ = 0.8 terminate earlier.
Table 9: Trajectory length comparison under different compression-control parameters.
Instance
ρ = 0.2
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.8
django django-16408
151
300
207
This difference indicates that ρ is not merely controlling how much history is retained. Instead,
it changes the agent’s effective reasoning process by shifting the balance between raw interaction
replay and structured internal-state accumulation.
E.2
TURN-LEVEL MEMORY COMPARISON
To make this shift explicit, we compare several aligned turns from the same instance. For each turn,
we focus on two observable quantities: (i) the amount of retained recent raw interaction context, and
(ii) the amount of information folded into the internal state update.
Qualitatively, the three settings exhibit distinct patterns:
• At ρ = 0.2, the agent keeps a larger amount of recent raw interaction history available, and
the internal state grows more conservatively.
• At ρ = 0.5, the controller more aggressively folds history into structured state, yielding a
much larger internal summary.
• At ρ = 0.8, the raw interaction surface is more selective still, and the agent relies more
heavily on compact but persistent summarized state.
This behavior is consistent with the intended role of ARSM: as ρ increases, context preservation
shifts from transcript-level replay toward state-level continuity.
E.3
REPRESENTATIVE SNIPPETS
We next compare representative excerpts from the trajectories. The purpose is not to compare the
exact semantic correctness of each intermediate reasoning step, but rather to show how the same
underlying task history is represented differently across compression regimes.
21


Preprint
Structured System State.
The strongest contrast appears in the internal state itself. At ρ = 0.2,
the state accumulates lessons, but the representation remains relatively restrained. At ρ = 0.5, the
state becomes much larger and encodes a long sequence of refined hypotheses about how join reuse,
nested relation resolution, and FilteredRelation paths should be handled. At ρ = 0.8, the state is still
substantial, but comparatively more compressed than the ρ = 0.5 case.
Episodic Raw Trajectory.
In lower-compression settings, recent raw memory retains more direct
traces of exploratory interaction. At higher compression levels, the retained raw content becomes
more selective and increasingly focused on the active subproblem.
Table 10:
Qualitative comparison of recent raw memory. As ρ increases, the raw interaction
surface becomes more selective and more localized to the current subproblem.
ρ = 0.2
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.8
Recent raw
interaction
remains broad and
preserves more
direct traces of
earlier file-reading
failures,
exploratory
inspection, and
repeated attempts
to understand
the relation
structure around
FilteredRelation.
Recent raw
interaction is
still available,
but it is more
selective; repeated
low-value inspection
is progressively
displaced by
folded state,
and the retained
raw messages
are increasingly
concentrated on
specific subproblems
such as join reuse
and multi-level
relation resolution.
Recent raw
interaction is
narrower still; the
visible raw context
is more sharply
localized to the
current debugging
hypothesis, while
earlier exploration
is no longer exposed
directly and instead
survives primarily
through structured
memory.
E.4
INTERPRETATION
This case study illustrates the intended operational effect of ARSM. Increasing ρ does not simply
delete history. Instead, it changes where the task-relevant information lives.
Under smaller ρ, the model can continue to rely on a larger volume of recent raw interaction history.
Under larger ρ, the controller increasingly shifts continuity into explicit state variables, such as
lessons, milestones, and active reasoning-path summaries. In other words, ARSM converts history
from a transcript-centric representation into a state-centric representation.
The django django-16408 example is useful precisely because it shows this transition in a
nontrivial long-horizon setting. The three trajectories do not merely differ in length; they differ in
memory substrate. This provides direct qualitative evidence that the compression-control parameter
controls not only context quantity, but also the form in which reasoning continuity is preserved.
22


Preprint
Table 11:
Representative internal-state excerpts. As compression increases, more of the long-
range reasoning trace is preserved through structured pitfalls instead of direct transcript replay.
ρ = 0.2
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.8
# Pitfall
- The file-reading
commands are
producing malformed
output; need a more
reliable reading
method.
- Need to use
grep or targeted
inspection to locate
FilteredRelation
first.
- The problem
likely concerns how
filtered relation
paths are resolved
in the ORM.
# Pitfall
- The fix needs to
be in setup joins
so that existing
joins are reused
when the field is
already part of a
FilteredRelation
path.
- The single-level
fix is insufficient;
nested paths such
as tournament pool.
tournament require
the second-level
relation to use the
correct join.
- The necessary
information may need
to be propagated
through the relation
metadata structure
rather than patched
only at the surface.
# Pitfall
- The current fixes
address part of
the join path but
still cache the
intermediate object
on the wrong model.
- The issue appears
deeper in how nested
filtered relations
are represented in
the relation chain.
- Submission may
need to avoid
unrelated test
edits and focus
on source-level
correction only.
23
