Coding Agent Memory Post-training:
Unlocking the Memory Potential of
Pre-trained File Operations
for Long-Horizon Tasks
via Reinforcement Learning
Lirui Luo, Kelong Mao, Heming Xia, Rongqing Li, Xinwei Yang,
Luyu Chen, Kieran Wong, Yudong Guo, Xinrui Wang,
Jiayin Zhu, Simiu Gu, Sulong Xu, Cong Fang
JD.com
Abstract
Language-model agents increasingly tackle long-horizon tasks whose interaction histories exceed
the model’s active context. Recent work has begun to use reinforcement learning to make mem-
ory control part of the policy, often relying on predefined memory tools within domain-specific
training environments of relatively short horizons.
This setup ties learned memory behavior
to environment-specific interfaces that lie outside the base model’s pre-training and must be
learned from scratch, so even after post-training, agents struggle to use memory in long-horizon
tasks. To address these limitations, we introduce Coding Agent Memory Gym (CAMG), a suite of
long-horizon agentic-RL environments spanning Shop, Coding, DeepResearch, and AutoResearch.
Alongside each environment’s native task interface, CAMG provides executable shell access and an
episode-persistent workspace, enabling agents to create, revise, search, and reuse files as memory
throughout an episode. We also introduce CAMG-RL, which trains a single policy jointly across all
four environments with fully asynchronous PPO, learning this file-based memory behavior directly
from downstream task reward, and we train CAMG-RL-4B and CAMG-RL-9B from Qwen3.5
models of matching size.
On SWE-bench Verified and MLE-bench Lite, CAMG-RL-4B and
CAMG-RL-9B are competitive with Qwen3.5-35B-A3B and Qwen3.5-122B-A10B, respectively.
1
Introduction
Language-model agents increasingly tackle long-horizon tasks that unfold through repeated tool use and
environment interaction [8, 57, 61]. As these interactions accumulate, information needed for later decisions
can fall out of the model’s active context. A coding agent, for example, may need to recall why an earlier fix
was rejected after that exchange has left the prompt.
Recent work has begun to use reinforcement learning to make memory control part of the policy, often
1
arXiv:2609.34422v1  [cs.LG]  28 Sep 2026


relying on predefined memory tools within domain-specific training environments of relatively short horizons
[16, 29, 31, 60, 69]. This setup ties learned memory behavior to environment-specific interfaces that lie outside
the base model’s pre-training, so even after post-training, agents struggle to use memory in long-horizon tasks.
What remains open is whether reinforcement learning on top of code pre-training can elicit a coding agent’s
ability to retain and reuse information beyond its active context.
To address these limitations, we introduce Coding Agent Memory Gym (CAMG), a suite of long-horizon
agentic-RL environments spanning Shop, Coding, DeepResearch, and AutoResearch. Across all four envi-
ronments, CAMG pairs each native task interface with executable shell access and an episode-persistent
workspace. Agents can therefore create, revise, search, and reuse files as memory throughout an episode.
We also introduce CAMG-RL, which jointly trains a single task-acting policy across all four environments,
learning from downstream task reward through this common interface, as Figure 1 illustrates. The policy
emits executable actions, may open each response with free-form reasoning, and develops its long-horizon
memory state in persistent, editable files. These files retain plans, evidence, and intermediate findings across
context replacements, while task reward shapes their creation and reuse. We implement CAMG-RL with
fully asynchronous PPO so rollout and learning proceed concurrently across variable-duration trajectories,
and we train CAMG-RL-4B and CAMG-RL-9B from Qwen3.5 models of matching size.
Context
only
CAMG-RL
in CAMG
Context boundary
Task brief
Repeated work
Task
unfinished
Task brief
cat <<EOF
grep / cat
CONTINUATION.md
notes.md
state.json
Memory files
Figure 1 CAMG-RL learns to use files as memory for long-horizon tasks. Each CAMG environment provides
the task-acting policy with an episode-persistent workspace that it can write, revise, search, and read through ordinary
filesystem actions throughout the episode. The illustrated context-boundary case shows the policy updating a bounded
CONTINUATION.md before context replacement and retrieving the saved working state through an ordinary file read
afterward.
Our contributions are threefold:
1. A long-horizon agentic-RL environment suite. We introduce CAMG with four environments that
require memory across context boundaries, each pairing native task interfaces with executable shell
access and an episode-persistent workspace.
2. A reinforcement-learning algorithm for coding-agent memory. We introduce CAMG-RL, which
2


learns from downstream task reward through fully asynchronous PPO to use ordinary coding-agent
filesystem operations as memory.
3. A systematic empirical study of learned coding-agent memory. We show that reinforcement learn-
ing on top of code pre-training can elicit reusable long-horizon memory: CAMG-RL-4B achieves the
highest average success rate across the four test environments and, on SWE-bench Verified and MLE-
bench Lite, CAMG-RL-4B and CAMG-RL-9B are competitive with Qwen3.5-35B-A3B and Qwen3.5-
122B-A10B, respectively.
2
Related Work
Learned memory control.
These methods let the policy decide when and how to store, update, and retrieve
information. Earlier work trains the policy to use dedicated operations over external stores [16, 60], and later
work extends this control to shorter-lived working or episodic state [31, 50, 69]. CAMG-RL introduces no
special memory tools: on top of code pre-training, it elicits the task-acting coding agent’s ability to maintain
memory through ordinary filesystem actions.
Learning to compact context.
These methods optimize the information retained across a bounded-context
transition. Kang et al. [19] and Li et al. [27] train a separate manager to compress context for a fixed task
executor. Other architectures place bounded internal state inside the trained policy [24, 68, 70, 79]. Policy-
generated summaries or adaptive compression also receive direct supervision from downstream outcomes
[15, 29, 32]. Across these architectures, the retained state lives in the active context or inside the trained
policy. CAMG-RL instead retains it in a bounded continuation file at each context replacement.
Long-horizon agentic-RL training environments.
These environments train agents through executable feed-
back over extended interactions. One environment suite spans diverse interactive tasks through a common
interface [56], and subsequent work adds multi-turn policy optimization and longer interaction horizons
[57]. Other environments score repository repairs with runnable tests [38], evaluate iterative improvement of
machine-learning artifacts [35, 42], or benchmark budget-constrained basket shopping [21]. CAMG provides
diverse, verifiable environments across four task families that require memory across context boundaries, each
pairing its native task interface with executable shell access and an episode-persistent workspace.
Table 1 summarizes these distinctions. Appendix E discusses additional related work.
Table 1 CAMG uniquely enables end-to-end RL of filesystem memory across verifiable, cross-context
tasks in multiple domains. Each environment produces its task reward by a fixed procedure from executed policy
behavior: three use programmatic checks, and DeepResearch answers are scored by a frozen semantic judge shared
by every evaluated method (Appendix A.1.3). We position CAMG among agent-memory benchmarks and trainable
agent environments. ✓= present, × = absent.
Multiple
domains
Task
reward
End-to-end
RL
Task across
contexts
Shell
access
Agent-memory benchmarks
LongMemEval [54]
×
×
×
×
×
MemoryAgentBench [14]
×
×
×
×
×
MemoryArena [10]
✓
×
×
✓
×
Trainable long-horizon agent environments
AgentGym-RL [57]
✓
✓
✓
×
×
SWE-Gym [38]
×
✓
×
×
✓
MLE-Dojo [42]
✓
✓
×
×
×
Coding Agent Memory Gym (ours)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
3


3
Preliminaries
Multi-turn agentic reinforcement learning. We study multi-turn interactive decision-making tasks, i.e.,
agentic tasks, and model each environment d ∈D as a finite-horizon partially observable Markov decision
process [51], Md = (Ud, Sd, Ad, Od, Td, rd). These terms denote the instruction, latent-state, action, and
observation spaces, together with the state-transition and reward functions. Given an instruction u drawn
from the environment’s instruction distribution µd, at turn t the policy observes the visible interaction history
ht and generates one complete response at ∼πθ(· | ht). The environment executes that response as an action,
returns an observation, and transitions to the next state. The actions and observations collected over at most
Hd turns form a trajectory τ of realized length T(τ) with task return Gd(τ) = PT (τ)
t=1 γt−1rd,t, where γ is the
discount factor.
Policy gradient. The policy maximizes expected task return,
Jd(θ) = Eτ∼pθ,d[Gd(τ)],
(1)
where pθ,d is the trajectory distribution induced by the policy and environment. The vanilla policy gradient
is
∇θJd(θ) = Eτ∼pθ,d

Gd(τ)
T (τ)
X
t=1
∇θ log πθ(at | ht)

.
(2)
4
Coding Agent Memory Gym
To train agents to use files as memory, we construct CAMG as a suite of four long-horizon environments.
Each environment combines verifiable tasks with executable shell access and an episode-persistent workspace.
Their tasks require agents to reuse information accumulated earlier in the episode. Appendix A.1 describes
the construction, selection, and data splits of all four environments.
4.1
Constructing Four Long-Horizon Environments
Shop.
Shop tests whether an agent can retain customer requirements and earlier purchase decisions across
a sequence of dependent purchases. We generate six-session tasks from 720 verified WebShop products [64].
Between sessions the environment clears the active session transcript, so later purchases depend on what the
policy retains.
Coding.
Coding tests whether an agent can complete a software repair whose diagnosis, repository edits,
and test evidence may span multiple active contexts. We draw issue–repository pairs and test-defined repair
objectives from SWE-smith [62]. We exclude non-executable tasks and those whose reference repairs fail their
tests, retaining 11,218 tasks from 93 repositories.
DeepResearch.
DeepResearch tests whether an agent can accumulate and reuse retrieved evidence over an
extended search. We use LiteResearcher’s Search–Visit–Answer interaction to gather evidence from a fixed
retrieval corpus before a scored final answer [25]. We exclude tasks that cannot run or be judged, combining
the two LiteResearcher releases into 26,597 tasks.
AutoResearch.
AutoResearch tests whether an agent can preserve hypotheses and validation evidence across
iterative model development. We use public OpenMLE task packages with datasets, executable submissions,
and native metrics [63]. We exclude tasks that cannot run or whose reference pipelines fail, retaining 931
tasks from 804 task families.
4.2
A Common Coding-Agent Interface
Across the four environments, CAMG standardizes an executable filesystem interface for using files as memory
while retaining each environment’s native task interaction and reward. Following the minimal, shell-only
4


interface of mini-swe-agent [61], the shared filesystem action is a single shell_command, which can create,
inspect, search, modify, and execute files, so the policy can preserve and revise task-relevant evidence and
intermediate state in the workspace. Let Atask
d
denote environment d’s native task-action set and Afs the
shared filesystem-action set. The CAMG action space is
Ad = Atask
d
∪Afs,
at ∈Ad.
(3)
One shell_command can produce both native-task and filesystem effects, so the two sets may overlap. Ap-
pendix A.2 specifies the common interface.
Figure 2 summarizes how this common interface connects task interaction and file use to the learning pipeline
described next.
LEARNING TO MANAGE MEMORY THROUGH CODING-AGENT ACTIONS
Rollout GPUs
o0
a0
o1
a1
ot
at
ot+1 at+1
oT
aT
…
…
file write
file read
Context
boundary
CAMG-RL policy
CONTINUATION.md +
Memory files
env.step
observation
Shop
Coding
Task
environments
DeepResearch
AutoResearch
Fully asynchronous PPO
episodes
PPO learner GPUs
actor
critic
Episode queue
reward
reward
weights
Figure 2 A single policy learns to use files as memory while solving long-horizon tasks. Task interactions
and filesystem operations form one policy trajectory over an episode-persistent workspace. At the highlighted context
boundary, the policy updates CONTINUATION.md. A later read brings the saved working state back into active context.
Each completed episode then carries its full trajectory record into fully asynchronous PPO, where the learner consumes
queued episodes and publishes updated weights for later episodes.
5
CAMG-RL
Section 4 equips every task with executable filesystem actions over an episode-persistent workspace. We now
ask how a policy can learn to use this workspace as memory from downstream task outcomes.
5.1
Learning to Use Files as Memory
At each turn, the policy samples at ∈Ad as defined in Eq. 3. Each response may open with a free-form rea-
soning span and always ends with an executable action. We place task interactions and filesystem operations
5


on the same action trajectory, propagate downstream rewards with GAE [44], and optimize every sampled
token, including policy-generated file contents, with clipped PPO under the task-return objective in Eq. 1
[45].
Dual-granularity PPO.
Existing multi-turn RL systems assign both operations a single granularity, turn-
level in Turn-PPO [22] and token-level in SAO [12]. Turn-level estimation is stable, because one reward arrives
per response, but coarse, because every token in a response shares one advantage. Token-level estimation is
fine-grained but high-variance, since splitting that reward across tokens depends on a learned value function.
CAMG-RL therefore estimates one advantage per response and clips one ratio per sampled token, keeping
the estimation stable and the update fine-grained.
This learning setup treats persistent, editable files as the policy’s long-horizon memory state. For the four-
environment set D, each rollout samples an environment uniformly, giving the joint objective
JCAMG-RL(θ) =
1
|D|
X
d∈D
Jd(θ),
|D| = 4.
(4)
Appendix B.1 defines the policy trajectory. Credit-assignment details appear in Appendix B.2.
5.2
Fully Asynchronous PPO for Variable-Duration Episodes
Episode duration varies across CAMG because rollouts take different numbers of turns and environment tools
have different execution costs. In a synchronous rollout batch, every worker waits for the slowest episode.
We therefore run rollout and learning fully asynchronously. One rollout process collects trajectories from
all four environments. Rollout workers append completed episodes to a persistent queue, while the learner
assembles them into optimization batches, updates one shared actor and critic, and makes the updated actor
available to later episodes. The queue therefore absorbs uneven episode completion times, so no worker waits
for the slowest episode. Appendix B.3 gives the execution algorithm, and Appendix B.4 gives the training
configuration.
6
Experiments
We first compare CAMG-RL with baselines on the test set and explain why filesystem memory makes effective
use of pre-training. We then measure external transfer and ablate the component variants. Finally, we isolate
the causal role of saved memory and present a case study.
6.1
Experimental Setup
Training. All trainable methods use Qwen3.5-4B [43] for 200 learner optimizer updates with 64 episodes
per update, totaling 12,800 episodes, under the uniform mixture over Shop, Coding, DeepResearch, and
AutoResearch in Eq. 4, trained with fully asynchronous PPO and native task rewards. Appendix B gives the
remaining hyperparameters and runtime details.
Baselines. As training-free controls on the frozen Qwen3.5-4B base, we evaluate Mem0 [2], which manages
an external store at inference, and Letta Code [37], whose git-backed MemFS descends from MemGPT [36].
Trainable baselines differ only in memory, keeping learned context compaction for CompactionRL [29] and
six LTM/STM tools for AgeMem [69].
Evaluation. We report per-environment success rates and their equal-weight average, with the success defi-
nitions in Appendix C.1. Trainable methods are trained using the CAMG train split and evaluated using the
CAMG test set, and all methods use the same 128 test tasks per environment, giving 512 tasks in total, with
matched greedy decoding, action budgets, runtimes, and graders. Unless stated otherwise, all frozen models
use CAMG-RL’s memory mechanism. We measure external transfer on SWE-bench Verified and MLE-bench
Lite [1, 17], where all rows use the same tasks, decoding, action budgets, task environments, and graders,
and unsuccessful assigned tasks count as failures.
6


6.2
Results
Table 2 CAMG-RL achieves the highest average success rate across the CAMG test set. We compare
CAMG-RL with training-free memory controls and learned-memory baselines.
Success rate, %
Method
Shop
Coding
Deep
Research
Auto
Research
Average
Frozen and training-free controls
Qwen3.5-4B
11.6
10.9
36.7
10.2
17.4
Mem0 [2]
15.6
14.8
37.5
10.9
19.7
Letta Code [37]
12.6
14.8
32.0
11.7
17.8
Learned-memory methods
CompactionRL [29]
97.5
19.5
50.8
24.2
48.0
AgeMem [69]
16.7
26.6
28.1
29.7
25.3
CAMG-RL
97.1
26.6
55.5
38.3
54.4
Learning filesystem memory beats training-free memory systems, learned compaction, and tool-based memory.
CAMG-RL achieves the highest average success rate, 54.4% versus 48.0% for CompactionRL, the strongest
baseline, because its memory files avoid the information loss that learned compaction incurs (Table 2). On
Shop both methods nearly saturate the environment (97.1% versus 97.5%), and the average gap opens on
Coding and AutoResearch. AgeMem trails far behind, perhaps because its dedicated tools fall outside the
pre-training distribution and are hard for the model to use. Training-free memory systems fare no better:
the frozen 4B policy they augment has a weak prior over when to store, retrieve, and use memory. Added
storage leaves the task bottleneck in place (Appendix C.1 reports the full action accounting).
The base policy already prefers filesystem memory actions over dedicated memory tools.
To test the hy-
pothesis that the dedicated tools fall outside the pre-training distribution, we measure how surprising each
memory action is to the frozen base, the mean negative log probability of the action tokens in nats per token
(Figure 3). Filesystem memory actions cost 0.076 to 1.193 nats per token across the paired store, retrieve,
revise, and remove intents, while AgeMem’s six dedicated tools are more surprising on every intent in their
own call format. In Table 8 we further rule out the tool names, the call format, and the documented shell
command as explanations for the gap. The prior therefore favors the filesystem action itself.
RL training on filesystem memory unlocks pre-trained capabilities that dedicated memory tools leave untapped.
Does RL training build on this prior? We track complete store–retrieve–use chains over the course of train-
ing (Figure 3b). These chains count only memory use beyond the continuation write that every context
replacement already requires, so the reported chain rates are voluntary use on top of that mandatory write.
CAMG-RL’s chains rise from 8.0% of episodes in the first quarter to 20.9% in the last, while AgeMem at-
tempts its memory tools in 53 of 261,941 responses and never completes a chain. To check whether this
difference reflects how far training moved each policy, we measure the distance of each trained policy from
the frozen base, in action distribution and in weight space (Figure 3c). Both distances are small, yet only
CAMG-RL converts this movement into complete memory chains: training on filesystem memory makes
effective use of pre-training. Appendix C.1 gives the complete protocol.
External benchmarks show trained task competence under distribution shift.
Whether the trained compe-
tence transfers beyond the CAMG training distribution remains open. We evaluate the final CAMG-RL-4B
and CAMG-RL-9B checkpoints on SWE-bench Verified and MLE-bench Lite, which cover the Coding and
AutoResearch domains. CAMG-RL-4B is competitive with Qwen3.5-35B-A3B and CAMG-RL-9B with the
frozen Qwen3.5-122B-A10B on both (Table 3). On SWE-bench Verified, CAMG-RL-4B resolves 15.8% of
assigned tasks, between the frozen 9B and 27B, and CAMG-RL-9B resolves 27.6%, above the frozen 122B-
A10B. On MLE-bench Lite they reach 4.5% and 9.1%, CAMG-RL-4B matching the frozen 9B, 27B, and
35B-A3B and CAMG-RL-9B matching the frozen 122B-A10B.
7


(a) Frozen-base action surprisal
(b) Memory behavior acquisition
(c) Base-to-trained policy shift
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
NLL ↓  (nats / action token)
CAMG-RL files
Aliased files
AgeMem tools in native form
AgeMem tools
1.19
1.18
1.36
1.40
Store
0.08
0.07
0.56 0.47
Retrieve
0.25
0.25
0.24
0.27
Revise
0.27
0.26
0.26
0.33
Remove
0
25
50
75
100
Rate (%)
CAMG-RL files
AgeMem tools
Executable operation
Complete memory chain
1–50
51–100
101–150
151–200
Training updates
0.0
0.1
0.2
KL ↓  (nats / action token)
0
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
Weight change ↓  (||ΔW|| / ||W||)
0.09
0.22%
CAMG-RL files
0.06
0.19%
AgeMem tools
Figure 3 The frozen base already prefers filesystem memory actions, and training converts this pref-
erence into complete memory chains while barely moving the weights. (a) Frozen-base action surprisal
on paired store, retrieve, revise, and remove intents. Renaming the filesystem tool to an unseen name (Aliased files)
keeps the surprisal within 0.013 nats per token of the native actions, and the hybrid control (AgeMem tools in native
form) recovers only a fifth of the store gap. (b) Complete store–retrieve–use chains and executable operations during
training. AgeMem never completes a chain. (c) Mean token-averaged KL of each trained policy from the frozen base,
and relative weight change over the language-model weights.
Table 3
CAMG-RL-4B, trained with file-based memory, matches the 35B-A3B member of its own
family on both benchmarks, and CAMG-RL-9B is competitive with the frozen 122B-A10B. We compare
both with frozen Qwen3.5 models from 4B to 397B-A17B on SWE-bench Verified and MLE-bench Lite. We report
issue-resolution rate on SWE-bench, Any Medal rate on MLE-bench, and their unweighted mean as Average.
Success rate, %
Method
SWE-bench
Verified
MLE-bench
Lite
Average
Qwen3.5-4B
7.6
0.0
3.8
Qwen3.5-9B
14.8
4.5
9.7
Qwen3.5-27B
17.4
4.5
11.0
Qwen3.5-35B-A3B
15.6
4.5
10.1
Qwen3.5-122B-A10B
22.0
9.1
15.6
Qwen3.5-397B-A17B
34.4
13.6
24.0
CAMG-RL-4B
15.8
4.5
10.2
CAMG-RL-9B
27.6
9.1
18.4
Memory-action gradients and general memory files both drive CAMG-RL’s gains.
We attribute the gains
by isolating two parts of the method: direct actor learning from memory-file responses and access to general
memory files beyond the bounded continuation file. Figure 4 compares full CAMG-RL with three component
variants, one for the gradients and two for the memory files. The variant without memory-action gradients
removes memory responses from the actor loss and nothing else.
The variant retrained without general
memory files is a separately initialized policy trained with the continuation file as its only memory file. The
variant evaluated without general memory files restricts the fully trained policy to that file without further
training. Removing memory-action gradients drops the average to 21.1%, close to the frozen base. Training
and evaluating with only the continuation file reaches an average of 41.8% versus 54.4% for the full policy.
8


Full CAMG-RL
w/o memory-action gradients
retrained w/o general files
evaluated w/o general files
20
40
60
80
100
0
Success rate (%)
97.1
12.4
64.1
0.0
Shop
26.6
17.2
21.1
23.4
Coding
55.5
32.8
50.0
53.1
DeepResearch
38.3
21.9
32.0
35.9
AutoResearch
54.4
21.1
41.8
28.1
Average
Figure 4
Memory-action gradients and general memory files both drive CAMG-RL’s gains, and the
evaluation-only restriction trades Shop for the other three environments. Grouped bars report the four
environment success rates and their equal-weight average for full CAMG-RL, w/o memory-action gradients, retrained
w/o general files, and evaluated w/o general files on the same test tasks.
Saved memory content drives later success.
The saved content could accompany success without driving it.
We therefore intervene on a trajectory’s saved memory files at its first context replacement. Blanking them
cuts average success by 14.1 points, and transplanting task-mismatched content cuts it by 11.5, with the
largest drop in Shop (Appendix D.3, Figure 8).
The trained policy writes, reads, and uses memory across a context boundary.
A single trajectory makes
the behavior concrete. We follow one Coding episode from a joint CAMG-RL training run. The task repairs
response logging in a Scrapy codebase. Figure 5 shows the trajectory terminating at step 30 within Coding’s
40-step action budget: the policy creates a reproducer, patches the missing scheduler method, writes a
continuation file before context replacement, reads it afterward, verifies the fix, and submits. Appendix A.4
presents one complete trajectory from each environment.
1. TASK + FIRST REPRODUCTION
2. REPRODUCER + PATCH
3. CHECKPOINT BEFORE CONTEXT REPLACEMENT
4. FRESH CONTEXT: READ BACK + VERIFY
TASK BRIEF (SCRAPY CODEBASE)
Response logging is broken
after recent changes
FIRST REPRODUCTION (INLINE PYTHON)
$ python -c "..."
# CrawlerProcess(...)
# inline reproducer
# no test_spider.py yet
AttributeError: Scheduler
has no attribute
'_mqpush'
AGENT WRITES MINIMAL REPRODUCER
$ cat > test_spider.py
# minimal local crawler
# new workspace file
NEW FILE; NOT TASK INPUT
INSPECT EXISTING SCHEDULER
scrapy/core/scheduler.py
enqueue_request(...)
self._dqpush(request)
# _mqpush missing
CORE PATCH (EXCERPT)
def _mqpush(request):
if self.mqs is None:
return False
self.mqs.push(request)
.agent_memory/
CONTINUATION.md
CHECKPOINT CONTENT (KEY LINES)
objective: Fix response
logging after changes
evidence: added _mqpush
in scrapy/core/scheduler.py
tested: no _mqpush error
next: run tests,
confirm logging, submit
CONTEXT REPLACEMENT
cat .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md
$ cat .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md
objective: Fix response logging
evidence: added _mqpush
tested: no _mqpush error
next: run tests, submit
RERUN AGENT-WRITTEN REPRODUCER
$ python test_spider.py
logging output observed
example.com DNS failure = noise
No _mqpush AttributeError
logging output observed
SWE grader: hidden tests passed
$ echo COMPLETE_TASK_AND_SUBMIT_FINAL_OUTPUT
$ echo COMPLETE_TASK_AND_SUBMIT_FINAL_OUTPUT
return 1.00
Figure 5
The trained policy carries the task state across the context replacement by writing and
reading the continuation file.
It records the objective, evidence, test status, and next step in .agent_-
memory/CONTINUATION.md before the replacement, reads the file back after it, and completes the task with hidden
tests passing (return 1.00). The patch card is an excerpt. The red divider marks the replacement.
9


7
Conclusion
In this paper, we studied whether reinforcement learning can elicit reusable long-horizon memory from
ordinary file operations. First, we introduced CAMG, a suite of four agentic-RL environments spanning
Shop, Coding, DeepResearch, and AutoResearch, where task execution depends on information acquired
before a context boundary. Alongside each environment’s native task interface, CAMG provides a common
episode-persistent workspace and ordinary coding-agent filesystem actions, letting one policy create, revise,
search, and reuse files as memory. We also introduced CAMG-RL, which trains a single policy jointly across
all four environments with fully asynchronous PPO, learning this behavior directly from downstream task
reward.
Trained this way, CAMG-RL-4B achieves the highest average success rate across CAMG’s four test en-
vironments, ahead of training-free memory systems, learned compaction, and tool-based memory, and the
two trained models remain competitive with Qwen3.5-35B-A3B and Qwen3.5-122B-A10B, respectively, on
SWE-bench Verified and MLE-bench Lite. By measuring how surprising different memory actions are to the
base model before training and tracking how it learns to use memory, we showed that this advantage comes
from fully exploiting and channeling the pre-trained preference for file operations. Finally, we demonstrated
the learned behavior in a case study: the trained policy writes, reads, and uses memory across a context
boundary.
Limitations.
The present study limits memory to one episode and one user and trains backbones only up
to 9B. Extending memory across episodes and users, and training larger backbones, are natural directions
for future work.
AI use statement
In this work, we use AI for implementing methods, reformatting datasets, and generating synthetic datasets.
We have not used AI for formulating mathematical claims, providing critical ingredients for proving math-
ematical claims, assisting in the writing of proofs, refining hypotheses, developing theoretical models or
conceptual frameworks, designing research methodology or experiments, assisting with translation, support-
ing qualitative and thematic data analysis, or interpreting results, and the remaining required disclosure
tasks are not applicable to this work. Additionally, we use AI for creating and modifying scientific figures,
creating and editing software code, drafting and editing parts of the paper, summarizing existing literature,
sourcing information, identifying relevant literature, and suggesting the paper’s structure. We have reviewed
all AI-assisted work. We checked mathematical arguments, verified citations against their sources, tested
AI-assisted code through the reported workflows, and reviewed AI-assisted figures and manuscript revisions.
We take responsibility for the final content of this work, including text, claims or artifacts produced with the
aid of AI.
Ethics statement
This work does not involve private data or raise ethical concerns.
Reproducibility statement
Section 3 defines the multi-turn POMDP and its complete-response policy-gradient setting. Section 4 instanti-
ates that setting through four long-horizon environments with a common workspace and context-replacement
procedure. Section 5 then uses this interface to define CAMG-RL and its fully asynchronous implementation.
Section 6 specifies joint training and the matched evaluations of the resulting checkpoint. Section 6.2 presents
the corresponding comparisons and a qualitative Coding trajectory from joint training.
The appendix follows the same dependency order. Appendix A first describes environment construction,
then the common interface—including its persistent workspace and context transitions—and task examples.
Appendix B specifies the policy trajectory, credit assignment, asynchronous implementation, training config-
uration, and ablation settings. Appendix C defines CAMG evaluation, failure handling, CAMG-RL ablations,
10


the memory-content intervention, interface adaptation, and external evaluation. Appendix E reviews addi-
tional literature related to the three main-text themes.
We document the datasets and task packages used to construct each environment, the PPO configuration,
the information stored for each episode, and the experiments that produced the reported results. The final
release will include the code needed to reproduce those results.
References
[1] Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio Starace, Kevin
Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, Lilian Weng, and Aleksander Madry. MLE-bench: Evaluating machine
learning agents on machine learning engineering. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[2] Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Building production-
ready AI agents with scalable long-term memory.
In ECAI 2025 – 28th European Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2025.
[3] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam Doron, Vlad Firoiu,
Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA: Scalable distributed deep-RL with
importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2018.
[4] Lasse Espeholt, Raphaël Marinier, Piotr Stanczyk, Ke Wang, and Marcin Michalski. SEED RL: Scalable and
eﬀicient deep-RL with accelerated central inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2020.
[5] Lang Feng, Zhenghai Xue, Tingcong Liu, and Bo An. Group-in-group policy optimization for LLM agent training.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
[6] Alexis Fox, Junlin Wang, Paul Rosu, and Bhuwan Dhingra. PRO-LONG: Programmatic memory enables long-
horizon reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.20064, 2026.
[7] Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Xujie Shen, Chen Zhu, Zhiyu Mei, Chuyi He, Shusheng Xu, Guo Wei, Jun Mei, Jiashu
Wang, Tongkai Yang, Binhang Yuan, and Yi Wu. AReaL: A large-scale asynchronous reinforcement learning
system for language reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
[8] Jiaxuan Gao, Wei Fu, Minyang Xie, Shusheng Xu, Chuyi He, Zhiyu Mei, Banghua Zhu, and Yi Wu. Unlocking
long-horizon agentic search with large-scale end-to-end RL.
In The Fourteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2026.
[9] Wei Gao, Yuheng Zhao, Tianyuan Wu, Shaopan Xiong, Weixun Wang, Dakai An, Lunxi Cao, Dilxat Muhtar,
Zichen Liu, Haizhou Zhao, Ju Huang, Siran Yang, Yongbin Li, Wenbo Su, Jiamang Wang, Lin Qu, Bo Zheng,
and Wei Wang. RollArt: Disaggregated multi-task agentic RL training at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22560,
2025.
[10] Zexue He, Yu Wang, Churan Zhi, Yuanzhe Hu, Tzu-Ping Chen, Lang Yin, Ze Chen, Tong Arthur Wu, Siru
Ouyang, Zihan Wang, Jiaxin Pei, Julian McAuley, Yejin Choi, and Alex Pentland. Benchmarking agent memory
in interdependent multi-session agentic tasks.
In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning,
2026.
[11] Zhiyuan He, Siwei Zhang, Zhiwen Zhou, Yuqing Yang, Yu Kang, Yuge Zhang, Luna K. Qiu, Tin Yan Tsui, Jiahang
Xu, and Chong Luo. Agent lightning v1.0: Towards harnessed agentic RL. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.17528, 2026.
[12] Zhenyu Hou, Yujiang Li, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong.
Single-rollout asynchronous optimization for agentic
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.07508, 2026.
[13] Mengkang Hu, Tianxing Chen, Qiguang Chen, Yao Mu, Wenqi Shao, and Ping Luo. HiAgent: Hierarchical
working memory management for solving long-horizon agent tasks with large language model. In Proceedings of
the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2025.
[14] Yuanzhe Hu, Yu Wang, and Julian McAuley. Evaluating memory in LLM agents via incremental multi-turn
interactions. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
11


[15] Zhexin Hu, Li Wang, Xiaohan Wang, Jiajun Chai, Xiaojun Guo, Wei Lin, and Guojun Yin. ZipRL: Adaptive
multi-turn context compression with hindsight response replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.28069, 2026.
[16] Yupeng Huo, Yaxi Lu, Zhong Zhang, Haotian Chen, and Yankai Lin. AtomMem: Learnable dynamic agentic
memory with atomic memory operation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.08323, 2026.
[17] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan.
SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?
In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024.
[18] Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan O. Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei
Han. Search-R1: Training LLMs to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. In Second
Conference on Language Modeling, 2025.
[19] Minki Kang, Wei-Ning Chen, Dongge Han, Huseyin A. Inan, Lukas Wutschitz, Yanzhi Chen, Robert Sim, and
Saravan Rajmohan.
ACON: Optimizing context compression for long-horizon LLM agents.
In International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2026.
[20] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich
Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented
generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
[21] Adrian Li, Kelong Mao, Yudong Guo, Heming Xia, Xinwei Yang, Lirui Luo, Jace Wong, Pu Yao, Sulong Xu, and
Simiu Gu. ComboShoppingBench: Evaluating LLM agents for budget-constrained basket shopping with coupons.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.09282, 2026.
[22] Junbo Li, Peng Zhou, Rui Meng, Meet P. Vadera, Lihong Li, and Yang Li. Turn-PPO: Turn-level advantage
estimation with PPO for improved multi-turn RL in agentic LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17008, 2025.
[23] Mo Li, L. H. Xu, Qitai Tan, Long Ma, Flood Sung, Ting Cao, and Yunxin Liu. Sculptor: Empowering LLMs
with cognitive agency via active context management. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2026.
[24] Ruoran Li, Xinghua Zhang, Haiyang Yu, Shitong Duan, Xiang Li, Wenxin Xiang, Chonghua Liao, Xudong Guo,
Yongbin Li, and Jinli Suo. MemPO: Self-memory policy optimization for long-horizon agents. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026, 2026.
[25] Wanli Li, Bince Qu, Bo Pan, Jianyu Zhang, Zheng Liu, Pan Zhang, Wei Chen, and Bo Zhang. LiteResearcher:
A scalable agentic RL training framework for deep research agent. In Conference on Language Modeling, 2026.
[26] Xiaochuan Li, Ryan Ming, Meng Chu, Shuai Shao, Rong Jin, and Chenyan Xiong.
ACM: Agentic context
management for long horizon tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.23809, 2026.
[27] Xiaozhe Li, Tianyi Lyu, Yizhao Yang, Liang Shan, Siyi Yang, Ligao Zhang, Zhuoyi Huang, Qingwen Liu, and
Yang Li. Escaping the context bottleneck: Active context curation for LLM agents via reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.11462, 2026.
[28] Yujiang Li, Zhenyu Hou, Xiaohan Jia, Zihan Luo, Zhilei Bei, Rui Lu, Hong Huang, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong.
MLE-RL: Reinforcement learning for self-improvement in machine learning agents. OpenReview preprint, 2026.
[29] Yujiang Li, Zhenyu Hou, Yi Jing, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. CompactionRL: Reinforcement learning with
context compaction for long-horizon agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.05378, 2026.
[30] Shukai Liu, Bo Jiang, Jian Yang, Yizhi Li, Jinyang Guo, Xianglong Liu, and Bryan Dai. Context as a tool:
Context management for long-horizon SWE-agents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL 2026, 2026.
[31] Xiaoyuan Liu, Tian Liang, Dongyang Ma, Deyu Zhou, Haitao Mi, Pinjia He, and Yan Wang. The pensieve
paradigm: Stateful language models mastering their own context.
In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2026.
[32] Miao Lu, Weiwei Sun, Weihua Du, Zhan Ling, Xuesong Yao, Kang Liu, and Jiecao Chen. Beyond the context
window: Scaling agentic RL via end-to-end optimized context compression. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2026.
12


[33] Weitao Ma, Xiaocheng Feng, Lei Huang, Xiachong Feng, Zhanyu Ma, Jun Xu, Jiuchong Gao, Jinghua Hao,
Renqing He, and Bing Qin. Fine-Mem: Fine-grained feedback alignment for long-horizon memory management.
In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), 2026.
[34] Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley, David
Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016.
[35] Deepak Nathani, Lovish Madaan, Nicholas Roberts, Nikolay Bashlykov, Ajay Menon, Vincent Moens, Mikhail
Plekhanov, Amar Budhiraja, Despoina Magka, Vladislav Vorotilov, Gaurav Chaurasia, Dieuwke Hupkes, Ri-
cardo Silveira Cabral, Tatiana Shavrina, Jakob Nicolaus Foerster, Yoram Bachrach, William Yang Wang, and
Roberta Raileanu. MLGym: A new framework and benchmark for advancing AI research agents. In Second
Conference on Language Modeling, 2025.
[36] Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez.
MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
[37] Charles
Packer,
Shubham
Naik,
Sarah
Wooders,
and
Caren
Thomas.
Letta
Code,
2026.
Software
repository,
revision
feb32e33;
https://github.com/letta-ai/letta-code/tree/
feb32e33c4f4badd546e75b70ef202283d6580da.
[38] Jiayi Pan, Xingyao Wang, Graham Neubig, Navdeep Jaitly, Heng Ji, Alane Suhr, and Yizhe Zhang. Training
software engineering agents and verifiers with SWE-gym. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference
on Machine Learning, 2025.
[39] Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein.
Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology, 2023.
[40] Aleksei Petrenko, Zhehui Huang, Tushar Kumar, Gaurav Sukhatme, and Vladlen Koltun. Sample factory: Ego-
centric 3D control from pixels at 100000 FPS with asynchronous reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
37th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
[41] Zehan Qi, Xiao Liu, Iat Long Iong, Hanyu Lai, Xueqiao Sun, Jiadai Sun, Xinyue Yang, Yu Yang, Shuntian Yao,
Wei Xu, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. WebRL: Training LLM web agents via self-evolving online curriculum
reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[42] Rushi Qiang, Yuchen Zhuang, Yinghao Li, Dingu Sagar V K, Rongzhi Zhang, ChangHao Li, Ian Wong, Sherry
Yang, Percy Liang, Chao Zhang, and Bo Dai. MLE-Dojo: Interactive environments for empowering LLM agents in
machine learning engineering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Datasets and Benchmarks
Track, 2025.
[43] Qwen Team. Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents, 2026. Qwen3.5 family release, February 2026; https:
//qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.5.
[44] John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional contin-
uous control using generalized advantage estimation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2016.
[45] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[46] Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Haibin Lin, and
Chuan Wu. HybridFlow: A flexible and eﬀicient RLHF framework. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European
Conference on Computer Systems, 2025.
[47] Anikait Singh, Teresa Zhang, Yoonho Lee, Roshen Sanjay Nair, Aviral Kumar, and Chelsea Finn. Librarian
agents: Anticipatory filesystem construction via reinforcement learning. In COLM 2026 Workshop on Eﬀicient
Reasoning, 2026.
[48] Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griﬀiths. Cognitive architectures for
language agents. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024.
13


[49] Weiwei Sun, Miao Lu, Zhan Ling, Kang Liu, Xuesong Yao, Yiming Yang, and Jiecao Chen. Scaling long-horizon
agent via context folding. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning, 2026.
[50] Xiaolong Sun, Qichao Wang, Hangyu Li, and Liang Chen. Verifiable memory: Learning unified memory man-
agement with local and global verifiers for large language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.03137, 2026.
[51] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, 2018.
[52] Zihan Wang, Kangrui Wang, Qineng Wang, Pingyue Zhang, Linjie Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Xing Jin, Kefan Yu,
Minh Nhat Nguyen, Licheng Liu, Eli Gottlieb, Yiping Lu, Kyunghyun Cho, Jiajun Wu, Li Fei-Fei, Lijuan Wang,
Yejin Choi, and Manling Li. RAGEN: Understanding self-evolution in LLM agents via multi-turn reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20073, 2025.
[53] Lei Wei, Xiao Peng, TT, Guannan Zhang, Chenhao Jiang, Hongyu Li, Lanbo Lin, Yuanwu Xu, Jiayao Liu, Kesu
Wang, and Bin Wang. PACE: Predictive adaptive context extraction for long-horizon LLM agents. In Proceedings
of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2026.
[54] Di Wu, Hongwei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Yuwei Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Dong Yu. LongMemEval: Benchmarking
chat assistants on long-term interactive memory. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[55] Xixi Wu, Kuan Li, Yida Zhao, Liwen Zhang, Litu Ou, Huifeng Yin, Zhongwang Zhang, Xinmiao Yu, Dingchu
Zhang, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Minhao Cheng, Shuai Wang, Hong Cheng, and Jingren Zhou.
ReSum: Unlocking long-horizon search intelligence via context summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.13313,
2025.
[56] Zhiheng Xi, Yiwen Ding, Wenxiang Chen, Boyang Hong, Honglin Guo, Junzhe Wang, Xin Guo, Dingwen Yang,
Chenyang Liao, Wei He, Songyang Gao, Lu Chen, Rui Zheng, Yicheng Zou, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu,
Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. AgentGym: Evaluating and training large language model-
based agents across diverse environments. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2025.
[57] Zhiheng Xi, Jixuan Huang, Chenyang Liao, Baodai Huang, Jiaqi Liu, Honglin Guo, Yajie Yang, Rui Zheng, Junjie
Ye, Jiazheng Zhang, Wenxiang Chen, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Guanyu Li, Zehui Chen, Zhengyin Du, Xuesong Yao,
Yufei Xu, Jiecao Chen, Tao Gui, Zuxuan Wu, Qi Zhang, Xuanjing Huang, and Yu-Gang Jiang. AgentGym-
RL: An open-source framework to train LLM agents for long-horizon decision making via multi-turn RL. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[58] Zijun Xie, Binbin Zheng, Enlei Gong, Jihua Liu, Yuyang You, Lingfeng Liu, Jiayao Tang, Guanqun Zhao,
Xiaoliang Fu, Aoqi Hu, and Zeyu Chen. ECHO: Prune to act, trace to learn with selective turn memory in
agentic RL. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.31650, 2026.
[59] Sikuan Yan, Ahmed Bahloul, Ercong Nie, Susanna Schwarzmann, Riccardo Trivisonno, Volker Tresp, and Yunpu
Ma.
Memory-R2: Fair credit assignment for long-horizon memory-augmented LLM agents.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2605.21768, 2026.
[60] Sikuan Yan, Xiufeng Yang, Zuchao Huang, Ercong Nie, Zifeng Ding, Zonggen Li, Xiaowen Ma, Jinhe Bi, Kristian
Kersting, Jeff Z. Pan, Hinrich Schuetze, Volker Tresp, and Yunpu Ma. Memory-R1: Enhancing large language
model agents to manage and utilize memories via reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2026.
[61] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir
Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[62] John Yang, Kilian Lieret, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kabir Khandpur, Yanzhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui,
Ofir Press, Ludwig Schmidt, and Diyi Yang.
SWE-smith: Scaling data for software engineering agents.
In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2025.
[63] Junlin Yang, Che Jiang, Yu Fu, Tianwei Luo, Can Ren, Weizhi Wang, Kaikai Zhao, Hongyi Liu, Yuxin Zuo, Yuru
Wang, Yuchen Fan, Kai Tian, Zhenzhao Yuan, Xiaojian Lin, Li Sheng, Rushi Qiang, Guoli Jia, Xingtai Lv, Ermo
Hua, Dianqiao Lei, Youbang Sun, Ning Ding, Bowen Zhou, and Kaiyan Zhang. Frontis-MA1: Training an AI4AI
model towards recursive self-improvement in machine learning engineering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.28568,
2026.
14


[64] Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. WebShop: Towards scalable real-world web
interaction with grounded language agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
[65] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
ReAct:
Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023.
[66] Rui Ye, Zhongwang Zhang, Kuan Li, Huifeng Yin, Zhengwei Tao, Yida Zhao, Liangcai Su, Liwen Zhang, Wenbiao
Yin, Zile Qiao, Xinyu Wang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Jingren Zhou, Siheng Chen, and Yong Jiang. AgentFold:
Long-horizon web agents with proactive context folding. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2026.
[67] Lu Yi, Runlin Lei, Liuyi Yao, Yuexiang Xie, Yuyang Li, Wenhao Zhang, Zhewei Wei, Yaliang Li, and Jian-Yun
Nie. Learning agent-compatible context management for long-horizon tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.30785,
2026.
[68] Hongli Yu, Tinghong Chen, Jiangtao Feng, Jiangjie Chen, Weinan Dai, Qiying Yu, Ya-Qin Zhang, Wei-Ying
Ma, Jingjing Liu, Mingxuan Wang, and Hao Zhou. MemAgent: Reshaping long-context LLM with multi-conv
RL-based memory agent. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[69] Yi Yu, Liuyi Yao, Yuexiang Xie, Qingquan Tan, Jiaqi Feng, Yaliang Li, and Libing Wu.
Agentic memory:
Learning unified long-term and short-term memory management for large language model agents. In Proceedings
of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2026.
[70] Qianhao Yuan, Jie Lou, Zichao Li, Jiawei Chen, Yaojie Lu, Hongyu Lin, Le Sun, Debing Zhang, and Xianpei
Han. MemSearcher: Iterative memory integration for search agent via end-to-end reinforcement learning. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026, 2026.
[71] Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boci Peng, Xuanbo Fan, Jiaxin Guo, Qiankun Li, and Yan Zhang. Mem-T: Densifying
rewards for long-horizon memory agents. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning, 2026.
[72] Hanchen Zhang, Xiao Liu, Bowen Lv, Xueqiao Sun, Bohao Jing, Iat Long Iong, Zhenyu Hou, Zehan Qi, Hanyu
Lai, Yifan Xu, Rui Lu, Hongning Wang, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. AgentRL: Scaling agentic reinforcement
learning with a multi-turn, multi-task framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04206, 2025.
[73] Liujie Zhang, Benzhe Ning, Rui Yang, Xiaoyan Yu, Jiaxing Li, Lumeng Wu, Jia Liu, Minghao Li, Weihang Chen,
Weiqi Hu, and Lei Zhang. Relax: An asynchronous reinforcement learning engine for omni-modal post-training
at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.11554, 2026.
[74] Yuxiang Zhang, Jiangming Shu, Ye Ma, Xueyuan Lin, Shangxi Wu, and Jitao Sang. Memory as action: Au-
tonomous context curation for long-horizon agentic tasks. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2026, 2026.
[75] Yuxiang Zheng, Dayuan Fu, Xiangkun Hu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyumanshan Ye, Pengrui Lu, and Pengfei Liu. Deep-
Researcher: Scaling deep research via reinforcement learning in real-world environments. In Proceedings of the
2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2025.
[76] Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Language agent tree
search unifies reasoning, acting, and planning in language models.
In Proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[77] Sizhe Zhou, Sheldon Yu, Hui Wei, Junda Wu, Siru Ouyang, Yizhu Jiao, Shijia Pan, Julian McAuley, Yu Zhang,
Tong Yu, and Jiawei Han. Filesystem-based memory for LLM agents: Organization, evolution, and sustainability.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.26637, 2026.
[78] Yifei Zhou, Andrea Zanette, Jiayi Pan, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. ArCHer: Training language model
agents via hierarchical multi-turn RL. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
2024.
[79] Zijian Zhou, Ao Qu, Zhaoxuan Wu, Sunghwan Kim, Alok Prakash, Daniela Rus, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and
Paul Pu Liang.
MEM1: Learning to synergize memory and reasoning for eﬀicient long-horizon agents.
In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
15


Appendix
Appendix Contents
A CAMG Environment Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
A.1 Environment Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
A.2 Shared Agent Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
A.3 Task Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
A.4 Filesystem-Memory Trajectories across a Context Boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
B CAMG-RL Training Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
B.1
Policy Trajectory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
B.2
Credit Assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
B.3 Asynchronous Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
B.4 Training Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
C Evaluation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
C.1
CAMG Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
C.2
External Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
D Additional Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
D.1 Interface-Prior Name-Token Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
D.2 Token-Level Estimation Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
D.3 Memory-Content Intervention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
D.4 AgeMem under Its Original Recipe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
D.5 The DeepResearch Drop of Common-Training AgeMem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
D.6 The Coding Failures of CAMG-RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
D.7 A Single Out-of-Distribution Tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
D.8 Robustness Across Training Runs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
D.9 Training Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
E
Extended Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A
CAMG Environment Details
A.1
Environment Construction
CAMG contains four environments built around long-horizon tasks in which information obtained early
can matter after the active context is replaced.
Shop composes new multi-session tasks from WebShop
products. Coding, DeepResearch, and AutoResearch select executable tasks from SWE-smith, LiteResearcher,
and public OpenMLE task packages, respectively. Each environment preserves its domain interaction and
definition of task success. CAMG adds a bounded active context and an episode-private workspace that
persists across context replacement.
A.1.1
Shop
Shop turns six WebShop purchases into one episode [64]. A later request can depend on a preference, con-
straint, or clarification established in an earlier session, so the policy must retain the relevant customer state
across browser resets. The interaction itself remains WebShop’s native search–browse–purchase sequence.
We first verify the product catalog, attribute file, price table, and Lucene index. CAMG uses products with
a unique normalized title, first-page search reachability, and matching ASIN and price fields in the purchase
record. The task generator then combines verified products into six purchase sessions with one cross-session
dependency. It fixes the customer, request sequence, candidate order, dependency branch, and total budget
so that exactly one sequence of six purchases is valid. Product titles are visible to the policy, while the
16


correct product IDs remain hidden and the environment checks each purchase. Paired branches preserve
later prompts and candidate order while changing the intended target. Table 4 lists the eight task families.
Table 4 Each Shop family requires information to persist across a six-purchase episode. We list the
CAMG-synthesized families. Paired variants keep later prompts and candidates fixed while changing the relevant
earlier state.
Family
Cross-session dependency
Natural attribute chain
A purchased attribute determines the required attribute in a later category.
Latent preference
Earlier choices establish a preference omitted from later requests.
Recency override
A later preference update replaces an earlier value.
Distractor robustness
The relevant profile must be retrieved among stale and unrelated records.
Compositional recall
Two earlier relations must be composed to identify a later target.
Negative constraint
Earlier exclusions leave one admissible option in later sessions.
Intent clarification
A value elicited in the first session must be reused later.
Selective memory use
Stored preferences matter only when the current request omits the value.
A wrong purchase ends the episode.
After each correct purchase,
the policy updates .agent_-
memory/CONTINUATION.md through the shared procedure in Appendix A.2.
Once the environment
confirms the write, it clears the browser, cart, page trace, and active session transcript before presenting the
next request. The customer identity, cumulative budget, purchase history, and episode workspace persist.
CAMG Shop contains 720 verified products: 576 are used for training and 144 for testing. The test products
generate 1,746 episodes in 873 counterfactual pairs. The final evaluation set contains 128 episodes from 64
complete pairs.
A.1.2
Coding
One Coding episode asks the policy to resolve a SWE-smith issue in a specified repository revision [62]. Diag-
nosis, code edits, and test results can span several context windows. The repository and episode workspace
therefore persist when the active messages are replaced, allowing later actions to reuse earlier evidence. The
policy signals a terminal submission with one shell_command that prints the fixed sentinel COMPLETE_TASK_-
AND_SUBMIT_FINAL_OUTPUT, following the mini-swe-agent convention [61]. A terminal patch succeeds only
when it passes the hidden grader.
Each included task has a complete issue statement and a working hidden grader. Its specified repository
revision and container can be reconstructed, and the reference repair passes the declared tests in that envi-
ronment. The resulting collection contains 11,218 executable tasks from 93 repositories, admitted from the
full SWE-smith corpus of 59,136 task instances across 223 repositories. The fixed experimental split uses
3,768 tasks from 72 repositories for training. The other 7,450 tasks come from 21 disjoint repositories. We
use 933 tasks from 10 repositories as the evaluation pool and sample 128 proportionally across them. The
executed training schedule samples from a runtime-health-filtered panel of 3,792 tasks from 73 repositories:
the split’s training set plus 24 tasks from one additional repository, which is disjoint from the evaluation pool
and from SWE-bench Verified.
A.1.3
DeepResearch
One DeepResearch episode asks the policy to answer a question by alternating between Search and paginated
Visit calls before one terminal Answer [25]. A frozen Kimi-K2.6 semantic judge, shared by every evaluated
method, determines whether the final answer is accepted. Evidence collected early may be absent from the
active context when the answer is produced. The persistent workspace can therefore retain candidate facts,
quotations, page locations, and unresolved conflicts for later use.
We combine two LiteResearcher releases. Each included task has a nonempty question, a search-capable
prompt, one or more valid answer aliases, and corresponding Search and Visit entries. The resulting collection
contains 26,597 tasks: 10,398 from the first release and 16,199 from the second. Each executable task is paired
17


with its corresponding Search index and paginated Visit corpus. Exact and near-duplicate questions are kept
on the same side of the split, producing 21,278 training tasks and 5,319 test tasks. The final evaluation set
contains 128 tasks sampled proportionally across release and dataset groups.
A.1.4
AutoResearch
One AutoResearch episode gives the policy a public OpenMLE task package containing data, a task de-
scription, and a sample submission [63]. The policy inspects the data, writes and runs code, and uses public
feedback to improve a candidate solution. Earlier observations, experimental choices, and intermediate results
can be preserved in the workspace across context replacement. A submit action sends the final submission
to the private grader and ends the episode.
CAMG includes packages with nonempty train and test data, a sample submission matching the test rows, a
nonconstant prediction target, and a native metric that can be reproduced under the stated runtime limits.
Each package also has a reference pipeline that completes fitting and prediction, and CAMG records its
public origin and license. Private labels and grader state remain unavailable to the policy. The grader scores
the final submission with the task’s native metric. The resulting collection contains 931 tasks from 804 task
families. The fixed split assigns 762 tasks from 664 families to training and holds out 169 tasks from 140
families. The final evaluation set contains 128 tasks, one from each of 128 families.
A.2
Shared Agent Interface
File actions.
All four environments retain their native task interactions and expose the same single filesystem
tool, following the minimal, shell-only interface of mini-swe-agent [61]. shell_command takes exactly one
parameter, a command string, runs every command from the workspace root, and can create, inspect, search,
modify, and execute files. Multi-line file content is written with one quoted here-document. At each step,
the policy produces one complete response. The environment executes that response once and returns an
observation, task reward, and terminal state. Each response is sampled once, executed once, and trained as
one RL step, and it consumes one action slot. A compound shell command remains one response even when
it starts several processes or changes both task files and memory files.
Each episode receives a fresh private workspace that remains mounted across policy responses and context
replacement. Only regular files below .agent_memory/ count as policy memory. Repository edits, generated
models, temporary files, and caches are not counted as policy memory. When one response changes both task
files and memory files, both changes remain part of that response. The workspace therefore lets the policy
preserve information outside the active context, following the distinction used in language-agent memory
architectures [48].
Context replacement.
The environment decides when context pressure or a declared subepisode boundary
triggers a replacement and announces the boundary with a fixed reminder: spend the next response creating
or updating .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md through one ordinary filesystem action, within the configured
8,192-byte limit, following the command shape shown in the reminder. Complying is the policy’s choice, and
the environment never writes or clears the continuation file itself. The requested write consumes one action
slot and is sampled and trained like every other policy response. A response that is not a valid checkpoint
write is still executed and charged. The active context is retained, and a bounded retry notice naming the
failure reason re-requests the checkpoint, so an episode can also end through its task’s terminal conditions
with no replacement ever occurring. The environment replaces the active message history only after it verifies
that the policy’s own action changed exactly this file into a nonempty regular file.
After a valid write, the environment replaces the active message history with the fixed task and tool in-
structions plus a neutral instruction naming the continuation path. It does not insert the file contents into
the new context. The workspace remains mounted. The policy can recover selected information through a
later ordinary file read. It may also maintain other files under .agent_memory/ and refer to them from the
continuation file.
18


Execution isolation.
Each episode runs in a network-isolated Linux sandbox with a separate writable root
and fixed limits on processes, execution time, output size, file count, and writable bytes. Public task inputs
are mounted read-only. Private credentials and grader state remain outside the sandbox. Episode termination
removes the writable workspace and processes owned by that episode.
A.3
Task Examples
Figure 6 gives a compact view of one task from each environment. The listings that follow show the corre-
sponding task inputs and interactions in detail.
Shop
Coding
DeepResearch
AutoResearch
Earlier
Purchase 1 of 6 · phone case
Black silicone case
approved listing 1
Space Gray
silicone case
approved listing 2
Customer confirms listing 1.
Later
Purchase 4 of 6 · window curtain
“Use what you learned from my earlier choices
for the color.”
Black blackout
curtain
Light Gray
sheer curtain
Issue
SectionWrapper.items() reverses items
and swaps keys with values
Reproduction
1
section = config['section']
2
for key, value in section.items():
3
    print(key, value)  # reversed and swapped
# observed order and tuple fields are wrong
5 issue tests · 23 regression tests
Submit a repository patch.
Question
In the 2024 Puerto Rican general election,
what was the combined vote share for the
pro-independence alliance of the PIP and
the Citizens’ Victory Movement?
Search
2024 Puerto Rico governor vote share independence alliance
Visit
2024 Puerto Rican general election
Answer using retrieved evidence.
Seattle House Price Prediction
Predict sale prices from public tabular data.
train.csv · 2,016 rows
Id
size
zip
price
1
2590
98144
795000
2
2240
98106
915000
test.csv · 505 rows
Id
size
zip
2017
2850
98119
2018
3040
98106
Target · price
Metric · RMSLE ↓
Features beds · baths · size · lot_size · zip_code
Write submission.csv and submit once.
Figure 6 Long-horizon CAMG tasks run under a bounded context window. Each panel summarizes one
task input and the interaction available to the policy.
A.3.1
Shop
This example asks the policy to reuse a color preference established in the first purchase during a later
shopping session.
19


Six-session preference task
Shop
[TASK INPUT]
Task ID: amglp.train.color.black_gray.2.e0.063376ff8c661234.t.4cef707f7988d219
Episode: six related shopping sessions
Purchase 1 of 6 - phone case
Option 1: Black silicone case
Option 2: Space Gray silicone case
Feedback: Customer confirms listing 1.
Purchase 4 of 6 - window curtain
Request: Use what you learned from my earlier choices for the color.
Option 1: Black blackout curtain
Option 2: Light Gray sheer curtain
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
search[keywords] -> click[ASIN] -> inspect product/options -> click[Buy Now]
[SHARED FILE INTERFACE]
shell_command: create, inspect, search, modify, or execute files
from the workspace root, with multi-line writes through one quoted
here-document
A.3.2
Coding
This example pairs a concrete iniconfig issue with the tests used to verify a repair.
Repository issue and tests
Coding
[TASK INPUT]
Instance: pytest-dev__iniconfig.16793ead.combine_file__mntnwwxj
Repository: pytest-dev/iniconfig
Issue:
SectionWrapper.items() reverses items and swaps keys with values.
Minimal reproduction:
section = config['section']
for key, value in section.items():
print(key, value)
# current output is reversed and swapped
[VERIFICATION]
Issue tests: 5
Regression tests: 23
Goal: submit a repository patch that passes all hidden tests.
[SHARED FILE INTERFACE]
shell_command operates on the executable repository and policy-authored
notes throughout the episode, from the workspace root.
A.3.3
DeepResearch
This example asks the policy to answer a question using evidence retrieved through Search and Visit.
Question with Search and Visit
DeepResearch
[TASK INPUT]
Example: LiteResearcher task 1521 from the first release
Question:
In the 2024 Puerto Rican general election, what was the combined vote share
for the pro-independence alliance of the Puerto Rican Independence Party and
the Citizens' Victory Movement, marking the first time since 1968 that the
pro-independence movement surpassed one of the two major parties in the
governor's race?
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
search[2024 Puerto Rico governor vote share independence alliance]
visit[policy-visible URL returned by Search]
answer[response supported by retrieved evidence]
[SHARED FILE INTERFACE]
Files may retain document locations, quotations, candidate facts, conflicts,
and open questions during repeated search and reading.
20


A.3.4
AutoResearch
This example asks the policy to develop a tabular model, produce submission.csv, and submit it once to
the private grader.
Public task package
AutoResearch
[TASK INPUT]
Task ID: house-price-prediction-seattle@1
Title: Seattle House Price Prediction
Metric: RMSLE (lower is better)
Budget: 30 policy actions
Public files:
train.csv - 2,016 rows, target column: price
test.csv
-
505 rows
Features include beds, baths, size, lot_size, and zip_code.
Example public rows:
Id,size,zip,price
1,2590,98144,795000
2,2240,98106,915000
Goal:
Inspect the data, write and revise code, run local validation,
create submission.csv, and invoke submit once when ready.
Submit sends the final file to the private grader.
A.4
Filesystem-Memory Trajectories across a Context Boundary
One successful trajectory per environment appears below. The Shop policy carries confirmed purchase at-
tributes in .agent_memory/notes.md across six session boundaries and completes all six purchases, the
DeepResearch and Coding policies store evidence and applied fixes in .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md and
reach a correct final answer and passing hidden tests after the context replacement, and the AutoResearch
policy persists its pipeline draft as train.py, repairs a holdout-split bug in that draft after the replacement,
and submits a valid prediction file. In each case the policy records task state in a workspace file, retrieves
it after a context replacement, and continues with native task actions that reach the environment’s success
criterion. The listings that follow place each file-memory write and read inside its surrounding policy action
sequence, while the source evidence records the exact file path, write/read orders, and native outcome.
A.4.1
Shop
This trajectory tracks a cross-session pairing dependency across six shopping sessions. Each session follows
the same search–click–note–buy loop. After confirming the cake flavor in session 1, the policy writes the
attribute to .agent_memory/notes.md, then writes a continuation checkpoint at the session boundary and
reads it back at the start of every later session.
Cross-session preference store and reuse
Shop
[TASK INPUT]
Six-session shopping task with one cross-session dependency and a
$410 total budget: buy one product per session in order (session 1
- cake base, session 2 - frosting, session 3 - food coloring, session
4 - decorating sprinkles, session 5 - cake topper, session 6 -
cookies); a later request can depend on a preference established in
an earlier session.
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
session 1, turns 1-2
turn 1
search["Betty Crocker Super Moist Triple Chocolate Fudge Cake Mix, 15.25 oz, 2 pk"]
turn 2
click[B00KQ0S8Q2]
[FILE-MEMORY WRITE]
turn 4, session 1 (turn 3 fails without .agent_memory)
shell_command: mkdir -p .agent_memory && cat > .agent_memory/notes.md << 'EOF'
+Confirmed cake flavor: chocolate
EOF
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
session 1, turn 5
turn 5
click[Buy Now]
-> correct purchase (chocolate)
21


[CONTEXT REPLACEMENT]
turn 6, session boundary
shell_command: mkdir -p .agent_memory && cat > .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md <<'EOF'
objective: Session 2 of 6 - select confection/decor. Total spent: $100.00. Remaining budget: $310.00.
decisive_evidence: Session 1 bought: Betty Crocker Super Moist Triple Chocolate Fudge Cake Mix, 15.25 oz, 2 pk ($100.00).
Note file: .agent_memory/notes.md contains "+Confirmed cake flavor: chocolate".
workspace_paths: .agent_memory/notes.md (read before Session 2), .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md (this checkpoint)
next_action: Read .agent_memory/notes.md, then search Session 2 approved product title verbatim
EOF
[FILE-MEMORY READ]
turn 7
shell_command: cat .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
session 2, turns 8-12
turn 8
search["Duncan Hines Whipped Cream Cheese Frosting, 14 OZ"]
turn 10 click[B00L15AOSG]
[FILE-MEMORY WRITE]
turn 11, session 2
shell_command: cat > .agent_memory/frosting_note.md << 'EOF'
+Confirmed frosting flavor: cream cheese
EOF
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
session 2, turn 12
turn 12 click[Buy Now]
-> correct purchase (cream cheese)
[CONTEXT REPLACEMENT + FILE-MEMORY READ]
turns 13-14, session boundary
shell_command: cat > .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md <<'EOF'
objective: Session 3 of 6 - select cake base. Previous frosting (Session 2) is Duncan Hines Whipped Cream Cheese Frosting, 14
OZ with cream cheese flavor. Determine cake flavor from Session 1 note.
decisive_evidence: Session 2 purchase confirmed: Duncan Hines Whipped Cream Cheese Frosting, 14 OZ (ASIN: B00L15AOSG). Note
file: .agent_memory/frosting_note.md contains "Confirmed frosting flavor: cream cheese".
workspace_paths: .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md, .agent_memory/frosting_note.md, .agent_memory/session1_note.md
next_action: Read .agent_memory/session1_note.md to get Session 1 cake flavor, derive Session 2 cake flavor per pairing table
, then search Session 2 approved card title verbatim.
EOF
shell_command: cat .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md
[NATIVE INTERACTION + FILE-MEMORY WRITE]
sessions 3-5
Sessions 3-5 repeat the cycle: food-coloring note "+Confirmed color: blue",
sprinkles note "+Confirmed listed accent color: silver", cake-topper note
"+Confirmed listed occasion: wedding", each followed by a boundary
checkpoint naming the confirmed attribute and the pairing rule it enables.
[CONTEXT REPLACEMENT + FILE-MEMORY READ]
turns 31-32, session 6 boundary
shell_command: cat > .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md <<'EOF'
objective: Session 6 of 6 - select dessert: previous cake topper (SOIMISS) has occasion = wedding; customer table requires
silver accent -> wedding occasion -> choose VALICLUD 2Pcs Flower Birthday Cake Topper ...
decisive_evidence: Session 5 purchase confirmed: SOIMISS 10 Pcs Heart Cake Topper ... (ASIN: B09PQJ4GMT). Previous sprinkles
(Session 4) accent color: silver -> per customer table: silver accent -> choose wedding occasion cake topper.
workspace_paths: .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md, .agent_memory/sparkles_note.md, .agent_memory/session1_note.md, .agent_memory
/frosting_note.md, .agent_memory/session5_note.md
next_action: Search for the VALICLUD cake topper verbatim, open matching result with ASIN, write note with +Confirmed listed
occasion: wedding, then click Buy Now
EOF
shell_command: cat .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
session 6, turns 33-35
turn 33 search["Scott's Cakes Pineapple Shortbread Cookies in a 1 Pound Plastic Deli Container"]
turn 34 click[B00UUN4YC2]
turn 35 click[Buy Now]
-> correct purchase
[NATIVE OUTCOME]
Six of six purchases correct (turns 5, 12, 18, 24, 30, 35).
Episode return 1.00.
A.4.2
DeepResearch
This trajectory accumulates evidence for a factual question over 23 actions. The policy narrows the search
to the Fr. John Murphy Monument in Tullow, County Carlow, but the town square’s name is still unknown
when a context boundary arrives at action 9, mid-research. The policy writes the objective, five collected
evidence items, and the next actions to .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md, reads the checkpoint back at
action 10, and continues the search for another twelve actions, absorbing four out-of-corpus visit penalties,
before producing the final answer.
Evidence checkpoint across a mid-research context replacement
DeepResearch
22


[TASK INPUT]
Question: A statue unveiled in 1905, made of white Sicilian marble
and standing on a limestone pedestal, commemorates the execution of a
Catholic priest who became a rebel leader during the 1798 Irish
Rebellion and played a key military role in engagements such as the
Battle of Vinegar Hill. This statue is located in a town square that
serves as a central bus stop in a County Carlow town and lies at the
intersection of the N81 and R725 roads. In which square is this statue
located?
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
actions 1-8
action 1
search["statue of Catholic priest rebel leader 1798 Irish
Rebellion Battle of Vinegar Hill white Sicilian marble
limestone pedestal County Carlow town square", ...]
action 4
visit[askaboutireland.ie/.../fr.-murphy-monument]
(Fr. John Murphy Monument in Tullow, County Carlow: white
Sicilian marble, limestone pedestal, unveiled August 1905,
executed in Tullow July 1798)
action 5
search["name of square in Tullow County Carlow where
Fr. Murphy Monument is located", ...]
action 6
visit[en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monument_Square]
(disambiguation page, unrelated)
actions 7-8
searches over the N81/R725 intersection; the monument
page says only "the Square in Tullow" without naming it
[CONTEXT REPLACEMENT]
action 9
shell_command: cat > .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md <<'EOF'
Objective: Identify the name of the square in County Carlow town where
a statue commemorates the execution of a Catholic priest who became a
rebel leader in the 1798 Irish Rebellion and played a key military role
in the Battle of Vinegar Hill. The statue is made of white Sicilian
marble, stands on a limestone pedestal, was unveiled in 1905, and is
located at the intersection of N81 and R725 roads.
Key Evidence:
1. Fr. John Murphy Monument in Tullow, County Carlow - Statue of Fr.
John Murphy (Catholic priest, rebel leader in 1798 Irish Rebellion,
executed in Tullow in July 1798)
2. Statue details: White Sicilian marble, limestone pedestal, unveiled
in August 1905, designed by Mr. Walsh of Carlow
3. Location: "the Square in Tullow" - situated in Tullow town square
4. Fr. John Murphy took prominent part in 1798 insurrection, captured,
tortured and executed in Tullow on July 2nd, 1798
5. Source: https://www.askaboutireland.ie/reading-room/... (Fr. Murphy
Monument page)
[...]
Next actions:
1. Search more specifically for the name of the square in Tullow
where the Fr. Murphy Monument is located
2. If found, confirm the square name matches all criteria
(intersection of N81 and R725, central bus stop)
3. If evidence is sufficient, answer the question with the square name
EOF
[FILE-MEMORY READ]
action 10
shell_command: cat .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
actions 11-22
action 11 search["name of the square in Tullow where Fr. John Murphy
monument is located", ...]
action 12 visit[askaboutireland.ie/.../fr.-murphy-monument]
("The Statue is situated in the Square in Tullow", still
no specific name)
action 13 search["main square Tullow name", "market square Tullow
name", "Tullow Bus Station square name", ...]
action 14 visit[en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eldon_Square]
-> outside the
released corpus (invalid-visit penalty -0.02)
action 16 visit[en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Square]
-> outside the
released corpus (-0.02)
actions 15, 17-21
further searches; two more out-of-corpus visits
(-0.02 each)
action 22 visit[en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tullow]
[NATIVE OUTCOME]
action 23
Based on the Wikipedia page for Tullow: "There is a statue of Father
John Murphy, one of the leaders of the 1798 Rebellion, who was captured
near Tullow and executed in the Market Square on 2 July."
answer[Market Square]
-> accepted under the fixed semantic judge.
Episode return 0.92 (answer reward 1.00 minus four -0.02
23


out-of-corpus visit penalties).
A.4.3
Coding
This trajectory repairs a repository issue and terminates at round 30 within Coding’s 40-round budget. The
policy materializes the issue’s reproduction spider as test_spider.py, confirms the scheduler defect on the
persisted script, and applies a scripted fix.
A context boundary arrives at round 18, before verification:
the checkpoint records the applied fix, the persisted test script, and the next action. The policy reads the
checkpoint back at round 19, re-runs the persisted script at round 20, and completes verification with the
repository’s own test suite.
Checkpoint and persisted test script across a context replacement
Coding
[TASK INPUT]
Instance: scrapy - response logging not working after recent changes.
Repository: scrapy
Goal: submit a repository patch that passes all hidden tests.
[NATIVE INTERACTION + FILE WRITE]
rounds 1-4 (persist the reproduction)
round 1
shell_command: ls
round 2
shell_command: python -c "import scrapy; ... process.start()"
(AttributeError: 'Scheduler' object has no attribute '_mqpush',
scrapy/core/scheduler.py line 259)
round 3
shell_command: cat > test_spider.py << 'EOF'
(the issue's reproduction spider, written as a workspace file)
round 4
shell_command: python test_spider.py 2>&1 | head -100
(the error is confirmed on the persisted script)
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
rounds 5-12 (locate and fix)
rounds 5-11
enqueue_request calls self._dqpush(request) and then
self._mqpush(request); grep shows _dqpush exists but _mqpush
is missing, and self.mqs has pop() but no push method
round 12 shell_command: cat > /tmp/fix_scheduler.py << 'EOF' ... EOF
&& python /tmp/fix_scheduler.py
(adds the missing _mqpush method after _dqpop in
scrapy/core/scheduler.py)
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
rounds 13-17 (verify with the persisted script)
round 13 shell_command: python test_spider.py 2>&1 | head -60
(the AttributeError is gone; only an expected DNS lookup
failure for example.com remains)
rounds 15-17
read tests/test_crawl.py to see how response logging
is verified ("Got response 200")
[CONTEXT REPLACEMENT]
round 18
shell_command: cat > .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md <<'EOF'
objective: Fix response logging broken after recent changes -
AttributeError: '_mqpush' missing in Scheduler
evidence:
1. Fixed: added _mqpush method to scrapy/core/scheduler.py after
_dqpop method
2. Tested: test_spider.py runs without AttributeError anymore
3. The spider now fails due to DNS lookup failure for example.com
(expected in test env), not code error
4. No more "AttributeError: 'Scheduler' object has no attribute
'_mqpush'" error
paths:
- scrapy/core/scheduler.py (modified)
- test_spider.py (test file)
- .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md (this checkpoint)
next: Run tests to verify the fix and confirm logging works, then
submit with final output
EOF
[FILE-MEMORY READ]
round 19
shell_command: cat .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
round 20 (the persisted script crosses the boundary)
round 20 shell_command: python test_spider.py
(the fix holds after the replacement; the DNS failure is
environmental)
24


[NATIVE INTERACTION]
rounds 21-29 (verify with the repository suite)
rounds 23-25
shell_command: python -m pytest -v -k log;
python -m pytest tests/test_scheduler.py -v -k log
round 27 shell_command: python -m pytest tests/test_crawl.py -v
(response logging visible in the test output)
round 29 The fix for `_mqpush` has been applied and the documentation
from the continuation note confirms the issue is resolved.
shell_command: grep -A 3 "_mqpush" scrapy/core/scheduler.py
[NATIVE OUTCOME]
round 30 shell_command: echo COMPLETE_TASK_AND_SUBMIT_FINAL_OUTPUT
Hidden tests pass.
Episode return 1.00.
A.4.4
AutoResearch
This 23-action trajectory addresses an Indonesian learning-style classification task over free-text study-habit
descriptions. The policy authors train.py through a quoted here-document and iterates on failing drafts for
fifteen actions without a single successful run. A context boundary at action 16 leaves an unfilled checkpoint,
so the policy reads the workspace back, diagnoses a holdout-split bug directly in its persisted draft, and repairs
the pipeline. The repaired script completes the first successful run at action 21, both one-time milestones
fire at once, and the episode submits a valid prediction file. The listing summarizes the intermediate rewrites
and failed runs.
Workspace-persisted draft diagnosed and repaired after context replacement
AutoResearch
[TASK INPUT]
Task: predict the dominant learning style (Visual, Auditory, or
Kinesthetic) for the test rows in data/test.csv from Indonesian
free-text study-habit descriptions, using at most 30 actions.
Deliverables: train.py that prints a measured validation metric,
and submission.csv matching data/sample_submission.csv row
identifiers.
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
action 1
shell_command: cat data/description.txt; echo "---"; head -5 data/sample_submission.csv; echo "---"; head -5 data/test.csv;
echo "---"; head -5 data/train.csv
[FILE WRITE]
action 2 (pipeline authored with one here-document)
shell_command: cat > train.py << 'EOF'
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
...
# Simple holdout split for validation (10% of train)
val = train.sample frac=0.1, random_state=42
...
X_train_vec = vectorizer.transform(X_train)
...
print(f'validation_macro_f1={_macro_f1:.4f}')
...
EOF
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
actions 3-15 (iterate on failing drafts)
action 3
shell_command: python train.py
(syntax error in the
validation split)
action 4
rewrite switches to train_test_split, but assigns
X_train, y_train = split[0], split[1]
X_val, y_val = split[0], split[1]
(the same half is reused for train and validation)
action 6
rewrite replaces the nonexistent metric import with a
plain accuracy computation
actions 8-12
add fit_transform, drop stop_words, and relax
min_df while the split bug persists
action 14 prose: the error indicates that `y_train` is being
treated as a 2D array ... rewrite converts the labels
with .values
action 15 shell_command: python train.py
(still failing, no
milestone earned before the boundary)
[CONTEXT REPLACEMENT]
action 16
shell_command: mkdir -p .agent_memory && printf '%s
' objective=OBJECTIVE measured_validation_or_failure=VALIDATION_OR_FAILURE conclusion=CONCLUSION code_path=train.py
next_action=NEXT_ACTION > .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md
(the checkpoint is written with the template unfilled)
25


[FILE-MEMORY READ]
action 17
shell_command: cat .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md
[NATIVE INTERACTION]
actions 18-23 (recover from the workspace)
action 18 The continuation file is empty. Let me check the current
state of the workspace to understand what's been done and
what's needed.
shell_command: ls -la /workspace/ && ...
(draft and data
files present, no submission.csv yet)
action 19 Let me check the current state of train.py and the data
files to understand what's been done:
shell_command: cat /workspace/train.py && ...
action 20 I can see there's an issue with the train.py script. The
holdout split logic has a bug - `train_test_split[0]` is
used twice, so train and validation share one half. Let me
fix this and run the script to get a proper validation
metric:
shell_command: cat > /workspace/train.py << 'EOF'
...
X_train, X_val, y_train, y_val = train_test_split(
train['text'], train['label'],
test_size=0.1, random_state=42,
stratify=train['label'])
...
print(f'validation_accuracy={accuracy:.4f}')
...
EOF
action 21 shell_command: python /workspace/train.py
(first successful code execution and first measured
validation metric together: one-time +0.05 milestone and
one-time +0.10 milestone, validation_accuracy=0.9241)
action 22 prose: the script runs successfully with a validation
accuracy of 0.9241 and creates submission.csv ...
shell_command: head -10 /workspace/submission.csv && ...
(197 lines matching the 196 test rows plus header)
[NATIVE OUTCOME]
action 23 - submit.
Valid submission accepted by the native grader.
Episode return 1.14 (execution milestone 0.05 + validation milestone
0.10 + terminal reward 0.99).
Across these trajectories, the same filesystem interface supports preference tracking, evidence accumulation,
repository debugging, and experiment iteration through policy-authored state that remains available through-
out the task.
B
CAMG-RL Training Details
B.1
Policy Trajectory
With CAMG-RL, we train one policy on trajectories that include both native task actions and filesystem
operations. At turn t, the policy samples one complete response at = yt,1:Lt, and the environment executes
it once. Each complete response forms one RL step:
zt = (ht, at, ℓb
t , rd,t, et, vb
t),
ℓb
t,j = log πθb(yt,j | ht, yt,<j).
(5)
Here ht is the bounded policy-visible context, ℓb
t contains the behavior log probabilities, rd,t is the reward
returned after the response, et marks episode termination, and vb
t identifies the behavior-policy version that
generated the response. Because every response enters the same trajectory, a filesystem response can receive
credit from task rewards observed later in the episode.
A write to .agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md is
sampled like any other policy response and constitutes one RL step. The subsequent context reset only
changes the next ht. It contains no sampled tokens and adds no PPO loss term.
B.2
Credit Assignment
We use the environment rewards defined in Appendix B.4. At turn t, rd,t is the reward returned by the
environment after at. For sampled token j, define the pre-token critic value
V −
t,j := Vϕ−(ht, yt,<j),
¯Vt := V −
t,1 = Vϕ−(ht) ≈E[Gt | Hvis
t
= ht],
(6)
26


where ϕ−denotes the critic before that learner update.
The actor and critic receive the same bounded
policy-visible context. The critic does not observe hidden native state or the contents of files that the policy
has not read. We compute GAE across response steps:
δt = rd,t + γ(1 −et) ¯Vt+1 −¯Vt,
(7)
bAt = δt + γλ(1 −et) bAt+1,
(8)
Gt = bAt + ¯Vt,
(9)
where ¯VT +1 = bAT +1 = 0 and γ, λ ∈[0, 1]. We set γ = λ = 1. The learner assigns bAt and Gt to every sampled
token in response t, giving the raw token advantage
Araw
t,j = bAt.
(10)
We center these advantages within each environment over non-padding policy tokens and normalize them
using a scale shared across the learner batch.
We then apply inverse environment token-count weights
Ntok/(DbatchNd) and a final masked standardization over the same batch. Here Ntok is the total number of
non-padding policy tokens, Nd is the count for environment d, and Dbatch is the number of environments
present. These operations affect actor advantages only. Critic return targets Gt are unchanged. We use At,j
below to denote the resulting normalized and weighted advantages.
For each sampled token, the current-to-behavior probability ratio is
ρt,j(θ) = exp

log πθ(yt,j | ht, yt,<j) −ℓb
t,j

.
(11)
For optimizer mini-batch k, let Rk be its responses and Ik = {(t, j) : t ∈Rk, 1 ≤j ≤Lt}. With policy clip
ϵ = 0.2 and value clip ϵV = 0.5, define
It,j = [V −
t,j −ϵV , V −
t,j + ϵV ],
eVt,j(ϕ) = clip(Vϕ(ht, yt,<j), It,j) .
(12)
The actor and critic losses are
L(k)
π (θ) = −1
|Ik|
X
(t,j)∈Ik
min(ρt,jAt,j, clip(ρt,j, 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ)At,j) ,
(13)
L(k)
V (ϕ) =
1
2|Ik|
X
(t,j)∈Ik
max
h Vϕ(ht, yt,<j) −Gt
2,
 eVt,j(ϕ) −Gt
2i
.
(14)
Every sampled token in a response receives the same normalized response-level advantage, so longer responses
contribute more terms to the actor loss. Later task outcomes can therefore update earlier filesystem responses,
including responses that write or retrieve memory.
No gradient from memory actions.
For this control in Figure 4, we keep rewards, returns, critic targets, and
critic loss unchanged but omit from the actor loss every response that accesses a file under .agent_memory/,
whether or not the operation succeeds. If one response also accesses task files, we omit the whole response
from the actor loss. These responses still change the workspace and count toward the same action, token,
runtime, and failure budgets. They receive no direct actor gradient, although updates from other responses
can still change later memory behavior.
B.3
Asynchronous Training
Episode duration varies substantially across the four environments.
Synchronous collection would leave
workers idle while the slowest interactions finish. We therefore let rollout and learning proceed independently.
Rollout workers use the same rollout process for all four environments and append completed episodes
to a persistent queue. The learner repeatedly consumes the earliest-dispatched complete episodes. Each
environment retains its task-specific transitions, context-replacement conditions, rewards, and termination
rules. The learner consumes 64 episodes per parameter update. Within those episodes, each complete policy
response is one action-level training example, and PPO minibatches contain 510 such responses. The episode
count and the response count therefore refer to different levels of the training procedure.
27


Algorithm 1: Fully asynchronous CAMG-RL training
Input:
fixed task schedule, four environments, actor, critic, episode queue Q, and learner batch size N.
Rollout workers, running continuously:
1
Take the next scheduled episode ID and initialize its task, native state, bounded context, and episode-
private workspace.
2
Sample one complete response from the latest actor using the fixed EOS-or-length stopping rule.
Save its context, sampled tokens, behavior log probabilities, stopping reason, and policy version.
3
Call env. step(at) and append the returned reward and terminal state. Apply any context replace-
ment before sampling the next response. Continue until the environment terminates the episode. If
the response limit Hd is reached, assign the final outcome to the last sampled response.
4
Enqueue the completed episode. Infrastructure faults follow the rerun rule in Appendix C.1.
Learner, running independently:
5
Dispatch the next N prompts to the rollout workers, wait until the queue holds N complete episodes,
and select the N earliest dispatched. Concatenate their responses, and pad tensors with masked
positions where needed.
6
Compute action-axis GAE and the token-level PPO losses above. Update the actor and critic, then
make the updated actor available to rollout workers after each learner update.
7
Save the identities of the episodes used, their policy versions, the optimization statistics, and the
checkpoint state.
Output:
one trained CAMG-RL policy.
Only complete episodes enter the queue, and each scheduled episode is used in at most one learner update.
Episodes that complete with task failure remain training examples. Infrastructure faults follow the rerun
rule in Appendix C.1. Because episode durations differ, the set of complete episodes available at each learner
update varies, so the environment mixture varies across learner updates.
A small warmup window and the current dispatch are the only prompts outstanding, so generation stays
close to the learner without any admission cap. Every queued or active response retains the behavior-policy
version that generated it, while only complete episodes enter the learner. For a response used at learner
version vℓ
k, policy-version lag is ∆vt = vℓ
k −vb
t. The clipped-PPO ratio compares current token probabilities
with the stored behavior probabilities.
Eﬀiciency and optimization measurements.
At each policy update, we record three groups of measurements.
Optimization health includes policy-version lag, PPO ratio tails, clip fraction, and effective sample size.
Workload composition includes each environment’s episode, policy-response, and token shares together with
queue occupancy and waiting time. Throughput includes completed episodes, training iterations, sampled
tokens, policy responses, accelerator-hours, and time spent in rollout, environment execution, learning, syn-
chronization, and checkpointing. Task outcomes are reported separately.
B.4
Training Configuration
CAMG-RL jointly trains on the four environments with equal episode allocation. We update all actor and
critic parameters. Table 5 gives the shared training configuration.
28


Table 5 CAMG-RL uses shared training settings with per-environment action budgets.
Group
Hyperparameter
Value
Model
Backbone
Qwen3.5-4B
Schedule
Parameter updates
200
Episodes per update
64
Episode sampling order
Oldest dispatched first
Episodes per prompt
1
Maximum action steps per episode
Shop 42, Coding 40, DeepResearch 40, AutoRe-
search 30
PPO
Discount factor γ
1
GAE parameter λ
1
Advantage normalization
Masked standardization
Policy clip
0.2
Value clip
0.5
PPO epochs
1
Entropy coeﬀicient
0
KL coeﬀicient
0
Optimization
Optimizer
AdamW
Policy learning rate
10−6
Value-function learning rate
10−5
Weight decay
0.01
Gradient norm limit
1.0
PPO minibatch size
510
Policy examples per GPU step
8
Value examples per GPU step
8
Sequence length
Prompt token limit
30,720
Response token limit
8,192
Observation token limit
8,192
Generation
Temperature
1
Nucleus sampling threshold (p)
1
Stopping rule
First EOS or response-length limit
Maximum tokens processed together
131,072
Maximum sequences processed together
32
Runtime
Distributed training
FSDP2
Training data type
BF16
Memory-saving technique
Gradient checkpointing
Text generation system
SGLang
Training GPUs
6
Generation GPUs
2
Let T denote the terminal response and ert the native environment reward. Table 6 defines the reward rt
used in action-axis GAE. At the response limit, the terminal reward is assigned to the final sampled response.
Shop retains rewards from earlier successful purchases.
29


Table 6 Task rewards are sparse and success-based across the four environments.
Environment
Reward rt
Shop
rt = ert/7 when ert > 0, and rt = ert otherwise. Correct purchases give ert = 1 in sessions 1–5
and ert = 2 in session 6. Invalid actions and incorrect purchases give ert = −0.01
Coding
rT = 1{hidden tests pass} and rt = 0 for t < T. A context-boundary response whose check-
point write fails to persist receives rt = −0.1
DeepResearch
rT = 1{semantic judge accepts the answer} and rt = 0 for t < T. Invalid actions, including
failed checkpoint writes, receive rt = −0.02, and the episode ends at the twelfth invalid action
AutoResearch
On a valid submission, rT = min(1, max(0, sT ) + 0.1) for direction-normalized private-grader
score sT , where the +0.1 is a one-time first-submission milestone. Invalid submissions give
rT = 0, exhausting the action budget without submitting gives rT = −0.01, and exceeding
the stated runtime limits gives rT = −1. For t < T, rt = 0 except two one-time milestones:
+0.05 for the first successful code execution and +0.1 for the first recorded validation metric.
Unparseable actions receive rt = −0.01
Training dynamics.
Figure 7 reports the success rate measured on training rollouts throughout the 200-
update joint run. These are temperature-1 rollouts on the training task pools, not test-set performance,
and the update-200 checkpoint is the one evaluated in Table 2. The plotted lines show non-overlapping
five-update bucket means over the 64 episodes completed in each update, with markers identifying the bucket
centers.
30


0
25
50
75
100%
Shop
96.2
0
20
40
60
Coding
31.7
0
25
50
75
100%
DeepResearch
65.1
0
20
40
60%
AutoResearch
34.2
0
25
50
75%
Equal-weight average
56.8
1
50
100
150
200
Training update
Figure 7 All four environments improve during the 200-update joint run. Each panel shows one environ-
ment’s success rate on training rollouts with temperature-1 sampling and 64 episodes per update, and the bottom
panel shows the equal-weight average. Lines are non-overlapping five-update bucket means, and each panel annotates
the final bucket of the checkpoint evaluated in Table 2.
C
Evaluation Details
C.1
CAMG Evaluation
CAMG evaluation uses 128 test tasks per environment. The split is disjoint by product for Shop, repository
for Coding, duplicate question group for DeepResearch, and task family for AutoResearch. All methods use
the same 512 tasks, decoding, action budgets, runtimes, interfaces, and graders. Every high-level memory
operation in a training-free control consumes one global action-budget step. Its internal model, embedding,
vector-store, or git subcalls are retained in the cost record but do not consume additional policy-action steps.
Training-free controls begin each task with empty memory, so memories never carry over across tasks. In the
variant evaluated without general memory files in Figure 4, the terminal CAMG-RL checkpoint can access
.agent_memory/CONTINUATION.md as its only memory file.
Its native task actions and task files remain
unchanged.
CAMG-RL ablations.
The component comparison uses the same tasks and runtime settings as the main
CAMG evaluation. The policy without memory-action gradients omits every memory-access response from
31


the actor loss while retaining rewards, returns, critic targets, and critic training. The policy retrained without
general memory files uses the bounded continuation file as its only memory file in training and evaluation.
The variant evaluated without general memory files applies that restriction to the terminal full-memory
CAMG-RL policy without additional training. It retains more of Coding, DeepResearch, and AutoResearch
than the retrained policy but collapses Shop to 0% (Figure 4). The fully trained policy keeps attempting to
write memory files beyond the continuation file, whereas the policy trained under the restriction consolidates
its memory into that file.
Success rates.
Let N = 128 be the number of evaluated episodes in each environment. Shop contains six
fixed shopping sessions per episode, so its success rate is PN
i=1 ci/(6N), where ci ∈{0, . . . , 6} is the number
of completed sessions. Coding is the fraction of episodes whose submitted patch resolves the issue under
hidden tests. DeepResearch is the fraction with an accepted terminal answer under the fixed semantic judge.
AutoResearch is the fraction with a valid submission whose direction-adjusted private score strictly beats the
frozen generic baseline. Invalid or missing submissions count as failures. Average Success is the unweighted
mean of the four rates.
AutoResearch also retains a continuous quality diagnostic. For raw score z, frozen generic baseline score b,
ideal native score z⋆, and metric direction d ∈{−1, +1}, it is
u = clip
 d(z −b)
d(z⋆−b), −1, 1

.
(15)
Here d = +1 for metrics that are maximized and d = −1 for metrics that are minimized. Every evaluated
task satisfies d(z⋆−b) > 0. An invalid or missing submission receives u = −1. We report mean utility and
the valid-submission rate as secondary diagnostics.
Training-free action accounting.
Across the 512 test tasks, Mem0’s automatic memory manager consumes
2,778 high-level memory steps, 5.43 per task, and the same evaluation contains 10,603 native task actions,
down from 12,535 for the frozen base. Letta Code issues 110 explicit MemFS actions among 13,399 action
rows.
Paired comparisons.
Let s(k)
e
be the success contribution of episode e for method k: completed sessions
divided by six for Shop and a binary success indicator for each other environment. For matched methods k
and k′, the task-level difference is
b∆k,k′ = 1
|E|
X
e∈E

s(k)
e
−s(k′)
e

.
(16)
We assess each paired difference with 10,000 paired bootstrap resamples of task IDs and treat a differ-
ence as significant when its 95% interval excludes zero. Resampling is stratified by environment, redraw-
ing each environment’s 128 task IDs.
The resulting average-success intervals, in percentage points, are
[51.6, 57.2] for CAMG-RL, [45.4, 50.6] for CompactionRL, and [22.7, 27.9] for AgeMem. The paired CAMG-
RL−CompactionRL difference of 6.4 points has interval [3.3, 9.5] and the CAMG-RL−AgeMem difference
has interval [26.6, 31.6], both excluding zero. Per environment, the CAMG-RL−CompactionRL intervals are
[1.2, 12.8] for Coding, [5.6, 22.8] for AutoResearch, [−1.4, 11.4] for DeepResearch, and [−1.7, 0.9] for Shop,
so the advantage is significant on Coding and AutoResearch, DeepResearch does not separate, and both
methods sit at the Shop ceiling (97.1 versus 97.5).
Invalid actions, failed commands, incorrect outputs, exhausted budgets, and missing submissions count as
failures within the fixed 128-task denominator. An infrastructure fault may be rerun at most twice with the
same task, checkpoint, and runtime settings. If the fault remains unresolved, the corresponding method–
environment cell remains N/A until all 128 assigned tasks have results.
Content intervention.
A trained-policy test trajectory must have at least one nonempty policy-created
memory file before its first completed context replacement.
Immediately after that reset and before the
next policy response, we fork the same post-reset state into three conditions. The intact condition leaves
32


all memory files unchanged. The blank condition preserves their paths but removes their contents. The
shuffled condition replaces their contents with length-matched content from a different eligible task in the
same environment. Donors follow a fixed within-environment permutation matched by byte length. The
policy, native task state, policy-visible post-reset context, non-memory files, sampling state, action and token
budgets, interface, and runtime remain identical across the three forks. We report the success-rate change of
blank and shuffled memory relative to intact memory for each environment and their equal-weight average.
This intervention tests whether saved content changes later policy behavior while filesystem actions and
memory-file paths remain available in every condition.
Interface-prior probes.
We compare CAMG-RL’s filesystem actions with the six dedicated tools used by
the AgeMem baseline using three diagnostics. First, we construct a fixed probe from 32 test-set task inputs
per intent, with paired store, retrieve, revise, and remove intents. The CAMG-RL and AgeMem versions
preserve the visible task prefix and memory content while changing the interface description and executable
action. A third version keeps the CAMG-RL filesystem backend, argument schema, file paths and bytes,
observations, operation semantics, action budget, and executor unchanged, but renames shell_command to
the fixed nonce name tool_kappa. The parser maps this name back immediately before invoking the same
executor. Under frozen Qwen3.5-4B, we score the executable action tokens with the exact chat template for
each version. Action surprisal is their mean negative log probability in nats per token. We use the nonce-name
variant only for the frozen-base probe. A fourth probe variant, the hybrid variant, keeps the six AgeMem
tools, their signatures, and their semantics, but renders every call and response in the native function-call
format, so the call format is held constant while the memory-tool semantics vary. This variant is also scored
only under the frozen base. A fifth diagnostic variant deletes every shell-command documentation passage
from the hybrid variant’s prompt, covering the schema entry, teaching lines, worked examples, and protocol
paragraphs, while holding the appended memory-tool block, target actions, setup turns, and responses byte-
identical to the hybrid variant. In the coding environment the deletion leaves the six memory tools as the
only documented functions. This variant is a counterfactual prompt, because in the coding and AutoResearch
environments the shell tool is also the task interface, and it is scored only under the frozen base.
Token-level decomposition.
A token-level decomposition of the same frozen-base items splits each target
action into the tokens of its tool name, located by byte offset in the action text through the tokenizer’s offset
map, and all remaining tokens. Each paired gap to the CAMG-RL version then decomposes exactly into a
name-token contribution and a remainder contribution, each weighting its segment’s nats by the target’s own
token count, so the two contributions sum to the paired gap.
Training-quarter metrics.
Second, we divide each 200-update training run into four equal quarters.
A
memory-operation attempt is a policy response that names .agent_memory/ or one of AgeMem’s six memory
tools, including a malformed call.
The executable-operation rate is the fraction of these attempts that
parse and execute. A complete chain contains a successful store or revision, a later retrieval of the saved
content, and a later task action that uses a saved fact recovered from memory.
The chain rate uses all
episodes in the quarter as its denominator. The chains therefore measure the memory use the policy adds
beyond the mandatory continuation write: every context replacement already requires a successful .agent_-
memory/CONTINUATION.md write (Appendix A.2), and this required write is not a chain link. In updates
181–200, 60.5% of episodes cross at least one context replacement and thus executes the required write.
Among these episodes, 41.3% also store to a memory file beyond the continuation file, 71.6% retrieve earlier
memory content, and 34.8% complete a full chain. From the per-update chain curve, T50 and T90 are the first
updates whose trailing ten-update mean reaches 50% or 90% of the mean over updates 181–200 and remains
above that level for the next ten updates.
Policy-shift distance.
Third, on the fixed probe prefixes, we compute the token-averaged DKL(πtrained ∥πbase)
between each trained policy and its frozen initialization. This measures how far the action distribution moved
to support each interface. In weight space, the relative change ∥∆W∥/∥W∥over all language-model weights
is 0.0022 for CAMG-RL and 0.0019 for AgeMem, and the vision tower is byte-identical to the frozen base in
both models. The frozen-base probe isolates the action rendering.
33


AgeMem baseline under common training.
For the AgeMem baseline, we retain the six LTM/STM tools
from the original method [69] but use the same base checkpoint, CAMG task schedule, fully asynchronous
PPO, native task rewards, and 200-update budget as CAMG-RL. This design compares the core memory
mechanisms under common training. In the original AgeMem recipe, three-stage progressive training, step-
wise GRPO, and composite rewards are combined. Using that recipe here would change the curriculum,
optimizer, and reward together with the memory interface. Appendix D.4 replicates the original recipe in
full and leaves the ordering unchanged. The comparison still bundles the storage backend with each interface’s
observation, retrieval, summarization, filtering, and capacity semantics. Appendix D.7 isolates the interface,
rerunning the same protocol with file modification routed through a single out-of-distribution tool, and the
resulting model trails the shell interface on every environment. The analysis attributes this hypothesis to the
measured frozen-policy distribution without inferring which training data produced it.
Interface-prior measurements.
Under the frozen base, filesystem actions cost 1.193 nats per token on store
intents, 0.076 on retrieve, 0.252 on revise, and 0.272 on remove. The nonce-name control changes these
surprisals by at most 0.013 nats per token on any intent. AgeMem’s dedicated tools cost more on every
intent in their own call format, and Table 7 decomposes each paired gap into its name-token and remainder
contributions. For the dedicated tools the store gap sits entirely in the remainder (−0.001 nats per token
on the name tokens), so their cost lies in the action markup and payload, while on revise and remove their
positive net gaps come from the name tokens (+0.038 and +0.165). In the hybrid variant the name tokens
are the expensive positions, at 6.371 nats per token on store against 0.252 for the native name, and they
carry +0.118 of that variant’s +0.166 store gap. Switching the call format recovers only 0.039 of the 0.205
nats-per-token store gap and makes the retrieve gap larger, so the frozen-base prior favors the filesystem
action rendering itself, with both the tool name and the call format measured as controls. The nonce-name
control therefore bounds the cost of renaming a documented tool, while an undocumented name in the native
function-name slot is itself expensive.
Shell-deletion measurements.
Table 8 reports the name-token surprisal of every variant. Deleting the shell
documentation from the hybrid variant’s prompt leaves the foreign names expensive: the store name tokens
still cost 6.757 nats per token against 6.371 with the documentation present, and 9.035 in the coding envi-
ronment, where the deletion leaves the six memory tools as the only documented functions. The paired store
gap grows to +0.354 nats per token, of which the name tokens carry +0.120 and the remainder +0.234, while
the retrieve, revise, and remove gaps stay close to the hybrid variant’s gaps. The name-token cost therefore
reflects the base policy’s pre-trained prior over action functions: a documented rename of the habitual filesys-
tem function stays cheap, and an undocumented name in the function-name slot stays expensive with the
documented competitor either present or deleted.
Training-dynamics and policy-shift measurements.
During training, CAMG-RL attempts memory opera-
tions in 18.7 to 30.2% of responses across quarters, its executable-operation rate rises from 72.8% in the first
quarter to 86.8% in the last, and its complete-chain rate rises from 7.97% to 20.9% of episodes with T50 = 54
and T90 = 79 updates. AgeMem attempts its memory tools 45, 6, 1, and 1 times in the four quarters (53
of 261,941 responses) and never completes a chain, so its T50 and T90 are not defined. Of the 53 attempts,
49 fail to parse as valid calls, most often a mismatched call envelope, and one well-formed call executes.
The remaining three responses name a tool in prose without emitting a call. CAMG-RL stores and reads
memory through ordinary shell commands, so no separate memory-call grammar exists to fail. The action
parser rejects 1,863 of its 306,095 training responses (0.61%), all on Shop (966, 448, 448, and 1 across the
four quarters), and 835 of the 76,446 memory attempts lie inside rejected responses and never execute. The
mean token-averaged DKL from the trained policy to the frozen base is 0.094 nats per token for CAMG-RL
(0.216 on store, 0.075 on retrieve, 0.029 on revise, and 0.058 on remove) and 0.064 for AgeMem (0.136, 0.046,
0.025, and 0.051). Both trained policies remain close to the frozen base, and only the CAMG-RL policy
acquires complete memory chains. The prior measured on the frozen base reaches training through emission:
filesystem actions are produced and executed from the first quarter, while the six tools, more surprising on
every intent in their own call format, appear almost only in malformed form, and reinforcement can build
only on what the policy emits.
34


C.2
External Evaluation
We evaluate transfer on SWE-bench Verified [17] and MLE-bench Lite [1]. The terminal CAMG-RL check-
point and the frozen models in Table 3 use the same tasks, decoding settings, policy-action budget, envi-
ronment runtime, and grader. Invalid outputs, exhausted budgets, timeouts, and missing submissions count
as failures. CAMG-RL retains its trained file-memory interface. At each context boundary, each frozen
comparator instead generates an automatic summary with a fixed prompt and byte limit. Summary calls
do not consume policy actions, but their calls, tokens, latency, and cost are reported. Neither benchmark is
used for training. The table reports one primary success rate per benchmark and their unweighted average.
SWE-bench Verified.
The primary score is issue-resolution rate on all 500 tasks under the oﬀicial container
grader. A task counts as successful only when the submitted patch passes that grader. Every method receives
the same repository snapshot, container image, shell and editing interface, action budget, and timeout.
MLE-bench Lite.
The primary score is Any Medal rate across all 22 competitions, namely the fraction of
competitions in which the terminal submission reaches at least the oﬀicial bronze-medal threshold. Each
method receives the prepared public data and task description, then produces one terminal submission for
the oﬀicial private-test grader. The grader’s continuous competition score and the valid-submission rate are
secondary diagnostics and do not enter the cross-benchmark average.
Evaluation precision.
Under exact binomial 95% intervals, the SWE-bench Verified rates are CAMG-RL-4B
[12.7, 19.3], CAMG-RL-9B [23.7, 31.7], Qwen3.5-4B [5.4, 10.3], the frozen 9B [11.8, 18.2], the 27B [14.2, 21.0],
the 35B-A3B [12.5, 19.1], the 122B-A10B [18.4, 25.9], and the 397B-A17B [30.2, 38.7], so the CAMG-RL-4B
and 35B-A3B intervals overlap almost completely. On MLE-bench Lite one medal moves the Any-Medal rate
by 4.5 points: the one-medal models, CAMG-RL-4B among them, share [0.1, 22.8], the two-medal models,
CAMG-RL-9B and the 122B-A10B, share [1.1, 29.2], and the three-medal 397B-A17B has [2.9, 34.9]. Context
replacement occurs 0.78 times per completed SWE-bench Verified trajectory, 385 replacement events across
the 493 completed trajectories, and 0.59 times per MLE-bench Lite task, where 13 of 22 tasks cross exactly
one boundary. The remaining seven SWE-bench Verified tasks receive no resolution judgment, six because
the sandbox environment fails before the trajectory completes and one because the submitted patch is too
large for the oﬀicial grader to classify. All seven count as failures in the 500-task denominator, as do unjudged
tasks for the comparison models. Across the CAMG test set, 65.0% of episodes cross at least one context
replacement, and replacement occurs 1.95 times per episode (4.95 on Shop, 1.61 on DeepResearch, 0.88 on
Coding, and 0.38 on AutoResearch).
Contamination control.
No training task shares a repository or competition with the external benchmarks.
The full SWE-smith corpus behind the Coding environment spans 223 repositories and contains none of SWE-
bench Verified’s 12 repositories, so no Coding training task can come from an evaluated repository. Four
training repositories belong to organizations that also maintain SWE-bench Verified repositories (iniconfig,
astroid, click, and daphne), but each is a different codebase. All AutoResearch training families are Kaggle
dataset entities, and none of their identifiers matches any of MLE-bench Lite’s 22 competitions.
D
Additional Results
This section collects the token-level tables behind the interface-prior measurements in Appendix C.1, together
with the estimation control against the default CAMG-RL on the same 512 test tasks. The closing subsec-
tions pair blank and shuffled replacements of each trajectory’s saved memory content against intact content,
replicate AgeMem under its original training recipe, rerun CAMG-RL with file modification routed through
a single apply_patch tool, train the two strongest methods five times each, and report the wall-clock time of
the formal training runs.
35


D.1
Interface-Prior Name-Token Analysis
We test whether the paired gap is an artifact of the tool names. Table 7 splits each paired gap into its name-
token and remainder contributions. On the store and retrieve intents, where the paired gaps are largest,
the plain variants owe almost nothing to their names, and the retrieve gap keeps most of its mass in the
remainder even in native form. Table 8 measures the name tokens directly. Deleting every shell-command
documentation passage holds everything else byte-identical yet leaves the foreign names expensive, so their
cost does not come from documenting the filesystem competitor. The prior therefore favors the filesystem
action itself, not its name.
Table 7 The paired gap is not about the tool name. Each paired gap is the difference in mean NLL per action
token against the CAMG-RL version on the same probe items. The name-token and remainder contributions each
weight their segment’s nats by the target’s own token count, so the two contributions sum to the paired gap. The
third variant of each group deletes every shell-command documentation passage from the hybrid variant’s prompt.
Intent
Probe variant
Paired gap
Name
Remainder
Store
AgeMem tools
+0.205
−0.001
+0.207
AgeMem tools in native form
+0.166
+0.118
+0.047
shell documentation removed
+0.354
+0.120
+0.234
Retrieve
AgeMem tools
+0.398
+0.022
+0.376
AgeMem tools in native form
+0.484
+0.193
+0.291
shell documentation removed
+0.477
+0.177
+0.300
Revise
AgeMem tools
+0.020
+0.038
−0.018
AgeMem tools in native form
−0.007
+0.066
−0.074
shell documentation removed
−0.011
+0.069
−0.080
Remove
AgeMem tools
+0.062
+0.165
−0.103
AgeMem tools in native form
−0.017
+0.234
−0.251
shell documentation removed
−0.024
+0.225
−0.248
Table 8 Deleting the documented competitor leaves the foreign names expensive. Each cell is the mean
surprisal in nats per token of the tool-name tokens of that variant’s target action, located by byte offset through the
tokenizer’s offset map. The first two rows call the documented filesystem tool under its native and nonce names. The
last row deletes every shell-command documentation passage from the hybrid variant’s prompt, holding the appended
memory-tool block, target actions, setup turns, and responses byte-identical, which leaves the six memory tools as
the only documented functions in the coding environment.
Probe variant
Store
Retrieve
Revise
Remove
CAMG-RL files
0.252
0.031
0.031
0.031
Aliased files
0.207
0.009
0.009
0.009
AgeMem tools
0.053
0.531
3.092
3.327
AgeMem tools in native form
6.371
3.763
5.184
5.306
shell documentation removed
6.757
3.323
5.319
5.095
D.2
Token-Level Estimation Control
This control replaces the response-level advantage estimation of Eq. equation 7 with per-token GAE: every
sampled token carries its own temporal-difference recursion over the pre-token values V −
t,j, and the resulting
token advantages pass through the same centering, environment token-count weighting, masked standardiza-
tion, and clipped PPO update as the default. Rewards, action and token budgets, prompts, decoding, critic
training, and the 200-update training schedule are unchanged, and the control is evaluated on the same 512
test tasks with the same runtimes and graders. Table 9 reports the result next to the default CAMG-RL. The
36


control trails the default by 4.3 points on average. The deficit concentrates in Coding (−7.8), DeepResearch
(−7.7), and Shop (−3.1), while AutoResearch changes by +1.6 points in the control’s favor.
Table 9 Token-level estimation control. Success rates (%) on the 512 test tasks of Appendix C.1. The control
replaces response-level advantage estimation with per-token GAE and changes nothing else in training or evaluation.
Policy
Shop
Coding
DeepResearch
AutoResearch
Average
CAMG-RL
97.1
26.6
55.5
38.3
54.4
token-level estimation
94.0
18.8
47.8
39.9
50.1
D.3
Memory-Content Intervention
We isolate the causal role of the saved content. Across all four environments, trained-policy trajectories with
nonempty memory are forked immediately after their first context replacement into intact-memory, blank-
memory, and same-environment shuffled-memory conditions (Appendix C). The task state, policy, sampling
state, budget, interface, and non-memory files remain fixed. The forking harness itself performs the required
post-reset re-read of the continuation checkpoint and withholds its observation, and all non-policy steps and
turn-budget skips are identical across conditions. Blanking the saved content cuts average success by 14.1
points and transplanting task-mismatched content by 11.5 (Figure 8). The largest blank drop is in Shop
(-29.4), the largest shuffled drop in DeepResearch (-16.7), and blank and shuffled content each reduce success
in every environment.
-32
-28
-24
-20
-16
-12
-8
-4
0
4
Δ Success vs intact memory (pp)
Blank memory
Shuffled memory
zero line = intact memory
Shop
n=128
Blank -29.4
Shuffled -14.4
Coding
n=29
Blank -13.8
Shuffled -6.5
DeepResearch
n=60
Blank -4.8
Shuffled -16.7
AutoResearch
n=23
Blank -8.3
Shuffled -8.3
Average
Blank -14.1
Shuffled -11.5
Figure 8 Saved memory content drives later success. Paired success-rate change from replacing each trajec-
tory’s memory files at its first context replacement: blank (erased) and shuffled (transplanted from a length-matched
same-environment task) versus intact content, in percentage points across all four environments.
37


D.4
AgeMem under Its Original Recipe
The main-table AgeMem model trains under the common CAMG protocol to isolate the memory mechanism.
To test whether the original training recipe changes the comparison, we replicate that recipe in full, with its
three-stage progressive training, step-wise GRPO, and composite rewards, on the same base checkpoint and
CAMG environments, and evaluate it on the same test tasks (Table 10). The recipe lifts Shop by 42.6 points
and DeepResearch by 19.6 over the common-training model, while Coding and AutoResearch land 1.6 and
7.0 points below it. The original-recipe model completes the store–retrieve–use chain in 14.1% of episodes, a
behavior the common-training model never shows, yet CAMG-RL still leads by 15.7 points on average and
completes chains in 20.9% of episodes in its final training quarter. The ordering of Table 2 is therefore robust
to the AgeMem training recipe.
Table 10 The original AgeMem recipe does not close the gap. Success rate, %, for the common-training
AgeMem model of Table 2, the same six tools trained with the full original recipe, and CAMG-RL. Chain is the share
of episodes that complete the store–retrieve–use chain in the final training quarter, and the common-training model
never completes one.
Success rate, %
Method
Shop
Coding
Deep
Research
Auto
Research
Average
Chain
AgeMem, common training
16.7
26.6
28.1
29.7
25.3
0.0
AgeMem, original recipe
59.3
25.0
47.7
22.7
38.7
14.1
CAMG-RL
97.1
26.6
55.5
38.3
54.4
20.9
D.5
The DeepResearch Drop of Common-Training AgeMem
Common-training AgeMem is the only learned-memory method in Table 2 that falls below its frozen base
on an environment, accepting 28.1% of DeepResearch answers against the frozen base’s 36.7%. The drop is
the out-of-distribution tool diﬀiculty made concrete. In the AgeMem interface, keeping an episode within
the training-matched 30,720-token width falls to the policy’s own compaction action, and in 33 of the 128
test episodes that action never arrives in time, so the episode is finalized at the environment horizon. The
frozen base and CAMG-RL keep width through the environment’s context replacement, whose required policy
cooperation is a filesystem write inside the pre-training distribution, and they record no such episode. Why
the action never arrives is the training story. The common protocol pays only native task reward, which
reaches an interface behavior only through later task success, and the six tools start outside the pre-training
distribution, so emission is unreliable from the first update and never consolidates. The chain measurement
records zero completed store–retrieve–use chains in 200 updates, and the compaction action belongs to the
same interface and consolidates no better. Because success on DeepResearch requires an accepted terminal
answer, the 36 accepted answers all fall in the remaining 95 episodes, a rate of 37.9% in line with the
frozen base, so the premature finalizations, not weaker answering, account for the deficit. Thirty-three of
the 34 finalizations recorded across the four environments fall on DeepResearch, the frozen base’s strongest
environment, while the other three start from frozen-base rates of 10.2% to 11.6% and gain 5.1, 15.7, and
19.5 points under the common protocol. The original recipe, whose composite rewards train the tool behavior
directly under three-stage progressive training, recovers DeepResearch to 47.7% (Table 10). The drop is the
training-side confirmation of the surprisal gap between the two interfaces. With the native task reward, the
environments, and the base policy fixed, moving the memory actions outside the pre-training distribution is
enough to pull the strongest environment below its frozen base. Memory learnability under the native task
reward alone is a property of where the environment puts its memory actions, and the six tools sit on the
wrong side of that line.
D.6
The Coding Failures of CAMG-RL
CAMG-RL resolves 34 of the 128 Coding test tasks, and the composition of the 94 failures locates the
remaining headroom. Every failure is a task failure, with no infrastructure exclusion. Fifty-eight of the 94,
38


61.7%, submit a patch whose hidden tests fail, after a median of 24.5 actions against 22 for the successes, with
a single submission inside the first ten. The working sequence completes and the fix is wrong, so this class sits
in code-fixing capability at 4B scale, not in the memory machinery. Thirty-five, 37.2%, exhaust the full 40-
action budget without submitting. Training and evaluation share this cap, and the continuation checkpoint
is in place in 33 of the 35 when the budget ends, so the longest episodes stop with their context boundaries
crossed and their saved state intact. Only one episode finishes without an executed action, on a response
that hits the length limit and fails to parse. Ninety-four of the 128 episodes cross a context replacement
boundary, and in every one of the 94 the policy writes its continuation checkpoint at the boundary and reads
it back after the replacement, in the 12 succeeding episodes and the 82 failing ones alike. The behavior
that end-to-end training builds on native task reward executes at every boundary it meets on held-out tasks.
Coding failures therefore divide into wrong fixes and unfinished fixes, and the headroom on Coding is fix
quality and action budget, with the trained memory behavior already running in full.
D.7
A Single Out-of-Distribution Tool
The AgeMem comparison changes the memory interface and the tool inventory at once.
To isolate the
interface, we train a variant that replaces native shell file edits with a single Codex-style apply_patch tool,
with the same base checkpoint and CAMG environments, and evaluate it on the same test tasks (Table 11).
The tool is powerful, and the variant must learn only one extra name and format. It still lands below CAMG-
RL on all four environments, 48.6% versus 54.4% on average, and after training 11.7% of its responses fail to
parse, against 0.61% across the shell interface’s whole training run and a single rejected response in its final
quarter. Memory acquisition slows but does not stop: the variant completes the store–retrieve–use chain in
15.6% of episodes, below the shell interface’s 20.9%, and AgeMem under common training never completes
one. Out-of-distribution emission, not tool capability, is the bottleneck: one such tool already carries parse
friction that training does not erase, and six cost AgeMem almost every attempt.
Table 11 A single out-of-distribution file tool does not recover the shell interface. Success rate, %, for
CAMG-RL and a variant trained under the same protocol with file modification routed through a single Codex-style
apply_patch tool. Parse is the share of responses the action parser rejects, over the whole training run for the shell
interface and after training for the apply_patch variant. Chain is the share of episodes that complete the store–
retrieve–use chain in the final training quarter.
Success rate, %
Interface
Shop
Coding
Deep
Research
Auto
ResearchAverage
Parse
Chain
CAMG-RL, shell file edits
97.1
26.6
55.5
38.3
54.4
0.61
20.9
CAMG-RL, apply_patch tool
90.6
20.3
52.3
31.3
48.6
11.7
15.6
D.8
Robustness Across Training Runs
Table 2 reports one training run per learned method. We train each method five times and evaluate every
run across the CAMG test set. The four-environment average is 55.3 with a standard deviation of 2.9 for
CAMG-RL and 47.1 with 3.5 for CompactionRL, so the mean ± standard-deviation intervals, [52.4, 58.2]
against [43.6, 50.6], do not overlap, and the single-run averages of Table 2, 54.4 and 48.0, fall inside them.
The 8.2-point gap between the means is more than twice the larger of the two standard deviations. The
ordering of Table 2 is therefore robust to the training run.
D.9
Training Time
Table 12 reports the wall-clock time of the formal training runs. All four models train for 200 updates on the
same six training GPUs, roughly 120 to 140 GPU-hours each, and every run finishes within about one day.
39


Table 12 Every formal training run finishes within about one day. All four use the shared asynchronous-
PPO configuration of Table 5 on the same six training GPUs.
Method
Scale
Wall-clock (h)
CAMG-RL-4B
4B
19.6
CompactionRL
4B
22.4
AgeMem
4B
23.6
CAMG-RL-9B
9B
23.2
E
Extended Related Work
Persistent external-memory systems.
These systems preserve information for later retrieval. Lewis et al.
[20] condition generation on retrieved documents. Generative Agents [39] retain past observations for later
reflection.
MemGPT [36] moves information between active and persistent storage through recall and
archival tiers. Mem0 [2] maintains long-term user memories through inference-time updates. Zhou et al.
[77] expose ordinary filesystem state as memory through agent-managed directories.
Librarian Agents
[47] reorganize a corpus in a filesystem before a frozen answering agent receives queries. PRO-LONG [6]
preserves complete interaction histories as lossless program-searchable logs. CAMG-RL adds no separate
memory system: the task-acting coding agent itself maintains memory through ordinary filesystem actions.
Agent-memory benchmarks.
These benchmarks test how agents retrieve, update, and use information across
long interactions. LongMemEval [54] tests extraction, temporal reasoning, updating, and abstention on chat
histories. MemoryAgentBench [14] measures incremental retrieval, test-time learning, long-range understand-
ing, and selective forgetting. MemoryArena [10] evaluates whether agents preserve and apply information
across interdependent multi-session interactions. These benchmarks evaluate memory without training it.
CAMG instead makes cross-context memory trainable from executable task reward.
Inference-time context compression.
These methods compress interaction history into bounded context at
inference time. PACE [53] presents selected historical chunks at multiple resolutions. HiAgent [13] summa-
rizes completed subgoals while keeping detailed records retrievable. ReSum [55] periodically restarts search
from the query and a summary, with optional distillation and reinforcement-learning adaptation.
These
methods are fixed at inference time. CAMG-RL instead learns what to keep from downstream task reward.
Learned context management.
These methods make active-context edits explicit policy decisions. Memory
as Action [74] learns to replace selected history through prune-and-write operations from downstream reward.
Sculptor [23] decides when to summarize, hide, restore, search, or fragment context. AgentFold [66] applies
context folding under supervised fine-tuning, while Liu et al. [30] provide a callable compressor for learned
context editing.
ACM [26] learns offloading and retrieval through dedicated tools, Yi et al. [67] train a
manager to edit a frozen executor’s context, and Sun et al. [49] learn branch-and-return actions. Their edits
remain inside the active context. CAMG-RL instead persists memory in files beyond it.
Memory-specific credit assignment.
These methods assign learning signals to memory decisions. Mem-T [71]
combines tree-guided rewards with hindsight attribution, and Fine-Mem [33] applies evidence-anchored attri-
bution to chunk rewards. Memory-R2 [59] compares edits within a global objective through local rerollouts
from shared memory states. ECHO [58] credits reused evidence and selection actions with positive outcomes.
CAMG-RL uses no memory-specific credit assignment, learning file memory directly from task reward.
Agentic reinforcement learning.
These works develop the reasoning patterns, execution interfaces, and
learning algorithms used by long-horizon agents. ReAct [65] interleaves reasoning traces with environment
actions, while Language Agent Tree Search [76] unifies self-reflection and environment feedback at inference
time. SWE-agent [61] shows that software agents depend on navigation, editing, shell use, and feedback
formatting. Agent Lightning [11] converts model-call histories into RL transitions. ArCHer [78] combines
utterance-level value learning with token-level policy optimization, Group-in-Group Policy Optimization [5]
uses episode- and step-level relative advantages, WebRL [41] trains agents through online curricula, and
RAGEN [52] adds trajectory-level stabilization. Search-R1 [18] trains search agents from outcome rewards,
40


LiteResearcher [25] adds diﬀiculty-aware local-web environments, and DeepResearcher [75] operates on the
live web. MLE-RL [28] drives iterative machine-learning engineering from task reward, Frontis-MA1 [63]
learns long-horizon execution-grounded operators, and AgentRL [72] trains one asynchronous policy across
multiple task families. CAMG-RL applies one asynchronous policy across four task families where memory
across context boundaries is itself learned.
Asynchronous reinforcement-learning systems.
These systems trace the move from parallel actors to fully
decoupled agentic-RL pipelines. Mnih et al. [34] train shared parameters with parallel actor–learners, and
IMPALA [3] corrects policy lag with off-policy updates in centralized learners. SEED RL [4] runs batched in-
ference on the learner and Sample Factory [40] optimizes single-machine sampling for throughput. HybridFlow
[46] supports RLHF with distributed execution primitives. Recent systems adapt actor–learner separation
to long language-model trajectories. AReaL [7] consumes mixed-policy rollouts under controlled staleness,
Relax [73] uses policy staleness as a system control, and RollArt [9] distributes rollout stages with bounded
weight staleness. SAO [12] reduces off-policy drift with single-rollout sampling and double-sided token-level
importance clipping. Gao et al. [8] decouple long search trajectories from model updates. CAMG-RL builds
on this line, running fully asynchronous PPO across the four environments’ variable-duration trajectories.
41
