Probing Stability–Plasticity Tradeoffs in Agent Memory through Cognitive
Experimental Paradigms
Jiaqi Ding
Department of Computer Science
UNC-Chapel Hill
jiaqid@cs.unc.edu
Guorong Wu
Department of Computer Science
Department of Psychiatry
UNC-Chapel Hill
guorong_wu@med.unc.edu
Abstract
Agent memory systems are increasingly used
to maintain long-term user preferences, task
states and evolving facts, but current evalu-
ations often collapse memory behavior into
final-answer accuracy. We introduce MEM-
PROBE, a cognitive-science-inspired frame-
work for diagnosing stability–plasticity trade-
offs in agent memory. The framework is mo-
tivated by a core insight from cognitive mem-
ory research: memory is reconstructive and
shaped by interference, source reliability, re-
inforcement, and reactivation. MEMPROBE
turns this insight into four reusable experi-
mental paradigms (interference, misinforma-
tion, consolidation strength, and reconsolida-
tion window) that manipulate when a mem-
ory should be updated, preserved, or treated
as uncertain. It further decomposes correct-
ness into behavioral profiles that reveal how
systems update, preserve, attribute, and tempo-
rally organize information. We instantiate these
paradigms in a 56-episode diagnostic suite and
evaluate six incremental memory systems un-
der a unified protocol. Results show that sys-
tems with similar aggregate scores exhibit dis-
tinct behavioral profiles. MEMPROBE provides
such a diagnostic lens, turning aggregate per-
formance into interpretable profiles of memory
maintenance over time. Code is available at
https://github.com/jq-ding/MemProbe.
1
Introduction
Two agent memory systems can achieve identical
accuracy but behave very differently when updat-
ing memory: one may aggressively overwrite prior
memories upon seeing new evidence; another may
retain outdated information unless explicitly cor-
rected. Identical scores can thus mask very differ-
ent risks for long-term memory (Figure 1).
This distinction has become increasingly impor-
tant because modern agent memory systems differ
substantially in how they store, retrieve, compress,
1
Update needed
Initial memory
Alice lives in Boston
New evidence
Alice moved to Seattle
2
Preserve needed
Initial memory
Weak/noise evidence
Maybe it is Room 310?
David’s office is Room 210
System A: 
Over-stable
System B: 
Over-plastic
Successfully 
preserved old 
information
Successfully 
accepted new 
update
Wrongly resisted 
new update
Same accuracy
Diverse behaviors
Ideal System
Wrongly forgot 
old information
Stability
Plasticity
Interference
Consolidation
Reconsolidation
Misinformation
Figure 1: Illustrative depiction of how the same accuracy can
mask distinct memory-update behaviors, motivating behav-
ioral evaluation beyond final-answer correctness.
invalidate, and update information. Retrieval-only
and Full-context systems often defer conflict resolu-
tion to query time, where a reader model interprets
the available evidence. Other systems maintain
memory during ingestion by extracting structured
facts, compressing interaction histories into evolv-
ing summaries, or applying explicit operations such
as ADD, UPDATE, DELETE, and NOOP. Therefore,
these mechanisms can produce different update ten-
dencies even when their final answers are similar.
Existing benchmarks have substantially ex-
panded the scope of long-term memory evalua-
tion. Long-context and conversational memory
benchmarks such as LongMemEval (Wu et al.,
2024), LoCoMo (Maharana et al., 2024) and Mem-
Bench (Tan et al., 2025a) evaluate temporal reason-
ing, knowledge updates, and multi-session under-
standing. More recent memory-agent benchmarks
such as MemoryAgentBench (Hu et al., 2026b),
MemoryStress (Sosa, 2026), AMA-Bench (Zhao
et al., 2026), MemoryArena (He et al., 2026) and
EverMemBench (Hu et al., 2026a) further move to-
ward incremental memory maintenance, contradic-
tion handling, agentic trajectories, and temporally
evolving decisions. These benchmarks are valuable
and have pushed the field beyond simple recall.
However, their primary outcomes remain task-
level correctness measures such as accuracy, F1,
arXiv:2609.30558v1  [cs.CL]  24 Sep 2026


recall or task success rate. Such measures tell us
whether a system produced the correct final answer,
but not what memory-update behavior produced
that answer. A system may answer a contradic-
tion case correctly because it retrieves the right
evidence, because it has learned a reliable update
policy, or simply because the test distribution fa-
vors update-needed examples. Conversely, a sys-
tem with high aggregate accuracy may still be over-
plastic or over-stable. As agent memory systems
become more diverse, evaluating only final-answer
correctness risks collapsing distinct update profiles
into a single score.
We therefore introduce MEMPROBE, a cognitive-
science-inspired framework for behaviorally evalu-
ating stability–plasticity tradeoffs in agent memory
systems. Rather than assuming access to an agent’s
internal memory, MEMPROBE controls the input
sequence and observes the resulting behavior. This
follows the experimental logic of cognitive memory
research: when internal memory states cannot be
directly observed, controlled behavioral paradigms
can reveal systematic memory tendencies.
MEMPROBE’s primary contribution is behav-
ioral measurements and a set of reusable paradigm
specifications for diagnosing memory-update dy-
namics. We make three contributions:
First, we introduce a paradigm-specification
framework for evaluating agent memory up-
date
behavior.
MEMPROBE
defines
four
diagnostic
paradigms:
Interference
(Under-
wood, 1957; Barnes and Underwood, 1959),
Misinformation (Loftus, 1975), Consolidation
Strength (Ebbinghaus, 1913; McClelland et al.,
1995), and Reconsolidation Window (Nader et al.,
2000). Each paradigm specifies what information
is encoded, what perturbation is introduced, what
variables are controlled, what probes are asked, and
what behavioral signatures are expected.
Second, we define behavioral metrics that
decompose aggregate correctness into multi-
dimensional stability–plasticity profiles. Based on
these metrics, MEMPROBE further generates a sys-
tematic behavioral profile for each evaluated mem-
ory system, summarizing its strengths, weaknesses,
dominant failure modes and stability–plasticity ten-
dencies in a structured report.
Third, we instantiate the paradigms in a com-
pact diagnostic suite and apply them to existing
memory systems. Empirically, MEMPROBE shows
that high-scoring systems can still differ markedly
in how they maintain evolving information, moti-
vating behavioral profiles rather than single-score
evaluation. At the same time, MEMPROBE is not
limited to this fixed suite: we provide the trial
structure, latent specification, controlled variables,
probe types, gold-label requirements, and scoring
protocol needed for researchers to construct cus-
tomized suites in their own domains.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
Sec.3 introduces the MEMPROBE paradigm spec-
ification. Sec.4 describes the evaluated systems,
input protocols and behavioral metrics. Sec.5 re-
ports results and analyzes stability–plasticity pro-
files, paradigm-wise behavior and failure modes.
2
Related Work
Agent Memory Systems. Modern agent mem-
ory systems (Park et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2026;
Zhong et al., 2024; Packer et al., 2024; Fang et al.,
2026; Tan et al., 2025b) differ substantially in
how they store, retrieve, compress, invalidate, and
update information. Extractive systems such as
Mem0 (Chhikara et al., 2025) and Zep (Rasmussen
et al., 2025) instead maintain structured memo-
ries by writing, merging or invalidating facts dur-
ing ingestion. Compression-based systems like
Observational Memory (Barnes, 2026) update an
implicit summary or observation state through re-
peated summarization. Policy-based systems such
as Memory-R1 (Yan et al., 2026) and AgeMem (Yu
et al., 2026) learn explicit memory operations.
These mechanisms can produce different update
tendencies even when their final answers are sim-
ilar, motivating evaluation that looks beyond task
accuracy to the underlying memory behavior.
Agent Memory Benchmarks.
Recent bench-
marks (Hu et al., 2026a; Wang et al., 2026; Bian
et al., 2026) evaluate how LLMs and agents retain
and use information across long interaction histo-
ries. LoCoMo (Maharana et al., 2024) and Long-
MemEval (Wu et al., 2024) probe long-horizon con-
versational recall through multi-session dialogue
tasks, while MemoryAgentBench (Hu et al., 2026b)
and MemBench (Tan et al., 2025a) move toward
incremental memory maintenance, treating mem-
ory as something accumulated through interaction
rather than read from a static long context.
Another group of benchmarks stresses mem-
ory systems with contradiction, noise, and evolv-
ing facts. MemoryStress simulates 1,000 sessions
with contradictions, fading memories, and accu-
mulated noise (Sosa, 2026), and MemoryArena


evaluates interdependent multi-session tasks where
later success depends on distilling earlier actions
and feedback (He et al., 2026). Concurrent with
our work, MemConflict (Tao et al., 2026) exam-
ines whether long-term memory systems retrieve
and apply memories that are temporally valid, fac-
tually correct, and contextually applicable under
conflicting evidence. MEMPROBE is complemen-
tary, rather than scoring task accuracy under long
horizons or conflict, it treats conflict as one mani-
festation of a broader stability–plasticity trade-off
and uses cognitive-science-inspired paradigms to
diagnose memory update behaviors.
3
From Cognitive Memory Paradigms to
Agent Memory Diagnosis
MEMPROBE formulates evaluation as a behavioral
diagnosis problem: controlled contexts manipulate
memory conditions, and targeted probes reveal pat-
terns of update behaviors.
3.1
Diagnostic Paradigms from Cognitive
Memory Research
Many agent memory systems differ in how they
store, retrieve, compress or update information.
Therefore, following the logic of cognitive mem-
ory experiments, MEMPROBE diagnoses memory
behavior through observable responses rather than
implementation-specific memory states (Figure 2).
Paradigm I: Interference.
This paradigm is mo-
tivated by classic AB −AC paired-associate learn-
ing studies (Underwood, 1957; Barnes and Under-
wood, 1959). Participants first learn an association
A–B and later learn a competing association A–
C. When probed with A, producing the old value
B after learning C reflects proactive interference,
whereas producing C when asked for the earlier
association reflects retroactive interference. The
paradigm therefore separates successful updating
from preservation of historical memory.
In agent memory, the same logic captures com-
petition among an established memory, a legitimate
update and a later distractor. This paradigm probes
excessive stability, where valid updates fail, and
excessive plasticity, where distractors intrude as
new memories.
Paradigm II: Misinformation.
This paradigm
studies how post-event misleading information can
distort memory for an original event (Loftus and
Palmer, 1974; Loftus, 1975). Its key insight is that
later information affects memory not only through
its content, but also through its source and credi-
bility: misleading details from trusted sources are
more likely to be incorporated, whereas unreliable
sources are more likely to be discounted.
In agent memory, conflicting values may come
from users, assistants, tools, retrieved documents,
stale trackers or third-party statements. The cen-
tral question is whether the system distinguishes
evidence from mere mention. A reliable user cor-
rection or trusted tool update may warrant revi-
sion, while a hallucinated assistant statement, ru-
mor or non-target value should not overwrite mem-
ory. This paradigm tests source-sensitive updating
and misinformation-driven over-updating.
Paradigm III: Consolidation Strength.
This
paradigm reflects that strongly reinforced mem-
ories are more resistant to disruption. Overlearning
improves retention (Ebbinghaus, 1913), and inter-
ference studies suggest that repeatedly learned asso-
ciations are harder to overwrite than weakly learned
ones (Underwood, 1957). Related reconsolidation
work further shows that more consolidated mem-
ories can be less susceptible to modification even
after reactivation (Milekic and Alberini, 2002).
For agent memory, this means update behavior
should depend on prior support. A fact repeatedly
confirmed across interactions should be harder to
overwrite than a one-off statement, especially un-
der weak or unreliable challenges. However, strong
reliable evidence should still allow revision. This
paradigm tests whether a system treats all memo-
ries as equally plastic or adjusts stability and plas-
ticity according to memory strength.
Paradigm IV: Reconsolidation Window.
This
paradigm shows that recalling a consolidated mem-
ory can temporarily make it modifiable (Nader
et al., 2000; Schiller et al., 2010). After reacti-
vation, new information may update or distort the
original memory before it stabilizes again. This
effect can also be selective: directly reactivated
memories are more susceptible to modification than
indirectly activated ones (De˛ebiec et al., 2006).
In agent memory, an old memory may be explic-
itly recalled before new evidence appears. Reacti-
vation can help compare old and new information,
but it should not make the system indiscriminately
accept weak speculation or misinformation. This
paradigm tests whether reactivation changes update
sensitivity, and whether that sensitivity is selective


Cognitive science-inspired 
experimental paradigms
P1: Interference
P2: Misinformation
P3: Consolidation strength
P4: Reconsolidation window
A
B
A C
(AB-AC, Competing associations)
Old association New update
Distractor
(Source credibility, misleading cues)
(Repeated reinforcement)
(Reactivation-induced modification)
Trusted 
source
Unreliable 
source
solidity
Strongly reinforced
Distractor
Reactivation 
Stored 
memory 
Probe
Memory 
Systems
Input trial episodes
Encoding
Perturbation
Probing
Observable 
Responses
Multi-dimensional probing
Behavioral 
metrics 
(report)
Current-value 
query
" What’s the current
project? " 
" What’s the project 
assignment before the 
last meeting? " 
Historical-value 
query
Source & conflict 
query
" Where did you 
hear about the new 
plan? " 
Temporal sequence 
query
" What happened 
first? " 
Stability (S)
Plasticity (P)
SP-balance
(Harmonic mean)
Stability-plasticity
profile
Fidelity metrics
Historical fidelity
Source fidelity
Temporal fidelity
Retrieval metrics
Δ (FC-RAG)
𝐑𝐀𝐆𝐧𝐨𝐫𝐦
Δ (split)
Failure attribution
Missed valid update
Over-update (Misinfo)
Historical erasure
Source loss
Retrieval error
Integration failure 
Overall accuracy
Figure 2: Overview of the MEMPROBE evaluation framework. Cognitive-science-inspired paradigms generate controlled
trial episodes that are processed by a memory system and queried through multi-dimensional probes. Observable responses are
converted into behavioral stability–plasticity profiles.
to reliable evidence rather than causing reactivation-
induced over-updating.
3.2
Controlled Trial Design
Each MEMPROBE trial is an ordered episode in the
encoding–perturbation–probing structure designed
to expose a specific memory-update behavior. In
an encoding stage, an initial target memory is es-
tablished. It may then include filler interactions,
near-miss facts or distractors to create a realistic
memory context and prevent the task from reducing
to simple recency matching.
The central manipulation occurs in the perturba-
tion stage. Depending on the paradigm, the pertur-
bation may introduce a valid update, a conflicting
but unreliable value, a weak challenge to an estab-
lished memory or an explicit reactivation of a prior
memory. Some trials also include post-perturbation
context, which tests whether the system is overly
sensitive to surface similarity, later mentions or
irrelevant recency cues.
Finally, the episode ends with targeted probes.
These probes query the system about the current
state, previous state, source of information, conflict
status or temporal update sequence. What must be
preserved is the controlled relation among the ini-
tial memory, the perturbation, the expected behav-
ior and the probe. App. B provides the construction
details of our demonstration suite.
4
MEMPROBE Evaluation Protocol
We now specify how MEMPROBE trials are evalu-
ated in practice. The goal is not to collapse systems
into a single ranking, but to make their responses
comparable through a shared input protocol and a
common set of behavioral measurements.
4.1
Systems and Input Protocol
MEMPROBE supports several input protocols (Fig-
ure 3). The first set of input protocols are used as
references/baselines (yellow boxes in Figure 3). A
Full-context reader receives the complete episode
at probe time and serves as an upper-reference for
whether the trial is answerable under complete ev-
idence. Retrieval-based baselines (Lewis et al.,
2020), including Naive RAG (retrieves the top-
k sessions independently for each probe), Time-
aware RAG (additionally incorporates session or-
der and temporal metadata) and Oracle RAG (pro-
vides gold-relevant evidence sessions to distinguish
retrieval failure from reader reasoning failure), in-
dex sessions as retrievable units and answer each
probe from retrieved evidence. We also include
heuristic baselines that use simple rule-based can-
didate selection, such as preferring the most recent
value or selecting values from specific source types.
These heuristics are not intended as memory sys-
tems, but serve as sanity checks for shortcut vulner-
ability. App. E reports schema checks, probe-level
validation, heuristic baselines, and cross-model val-
idation results.
Our primary evaluation setting is incremental
memory maintenance (purple boxes in Figure 3)
because it requires the system to decide during
ingestion whether new evidence should update,
preserve or coexist with prior memory. For each
episode, the memory store is reset and sessions are
provided in chronological order. At probe time, the


Full-context reading
sess
sess
sess
sess
Upper-reference
All evidence 
ingested
Retrieval-based reading
Retrieval baseline
Top-k evidence
sess
Batch memory
Compressed 
evidence ingested
sess
sess
sess
sess
Separate mode
Incremental memory
Main evaluation
Sequential 
ingestion
Rule-based selection
Shortcut-check
Reference / Baselines
Memory systems
sess
Always 
update/preserve
Figure 3: Input protocols used in MEMPROBE. Full-context reading, retrieval-based reading, heuristic baselines,
batch memory, and incremental memory correspond to different computational interpretations of memory and are
therefore reported separately. Incremental memory is the primary setting for evaluating stability–plasticity behavior.
system must answer using its maintained memory
state, retrieval interface or internal memory mech-
anism. Formally, for an episode e with sessions
{st}T
t=1 and probes {qj}m
j=1, the protocol is:
M0 ←Reset(),
Mt ←Ingest(Mt−1, st),
t = 1, . . . , T,
ˆaj ←Query(MT , qj),
j = 1, . . . , m.
(1)
We evaluate six incremental memory systems
under the same sequential-ingestion protocol:
Mem0 (Chhikara et al., 2025), Zep/Graphiti (Ras-
mussen et al., 2025), LangMem (The LangChain
Team, 2025), Cognee (Markovic et al., 2025), A-
MEM (Xu et al., 2025), and MemoryOS (Kang
et al., 2025).
These systems cover extraction-
based memory, temporal knowledge-graph mem-
ory, framework-level memory primitives, graph-
vector hybrid memory, agentic self-organizing
memory and hierarchical memory-OS designs. For
consistency, all systems are fed the same ordered
sessions and are probed using a unified reader over
their retrieved or extracted memory. When a sys-
tem requires an internal LLM for memory extrac-
tion or consolidation, we use the same internal
model whenever the interface permits.
4.2
Behavioral Metrics
All metrics are computed from structured probe
scores. A probe score records whether the system’s
answer matches the structured gold fields required
by that probe, such as the current/previous values.
We define the full probe taxonomy and scoring pro-
cedure in App. C. Let Q denote the set of all probes
and let c(q, S) be an indicator of whether system
S answers probe q correctly under this scoring pro-
cedure. We define accuracy over any probe subset
D as:
A(S; D) =
1
|D|
X
q∈D
c(q, S).
(2)
Overall accuracy is computed by applying Eq. (2)
to all probes: Acc(S) = A(S; Q).
Unless noted otherwise, confidence intervals are
episode-level bootstrap intervals (2,000 resamples,
fixed seed), and system comparisons use paired
bootstrap on the same resampled episodes.
Stability–plasticity
metrics.
Let
U
denote
probes from trials where the expected behavior is to
accept a valid update, and let P denote probes from
trials where the expected behavior is to preserve
the existing memory. Using Eq. (2), we define
plasticity and stability as:
Plasticity(S) = A(S; U),
Stability(S) = A(S; P).
(3)
The complementary condition-level error rates are:
UpdateError(S) = 1 −Plasticity(S),
PreserveError(S) = 1 −Stability(S).
(4)
To provide a compact summary across the two con-
ditions, we report their harmonic mean:
SP-Balance(S) = 2 Plasticity(S) Stability(S)
Plasticity(S) + Stability(S).
(5)
Eq. (5) penalizes systems that perform well on only
one side of the stability–plasticity tradeoff.
Historical, source and temporal fidelity.
We de-
rive fidelity metrics from the corresponding probe
types defined in App. C.1. Historical fidelity is mea-
sured by previous-value accuracy, source fidelity by
source and conflict-status accuracy, and temporal
fidelity by temporal-probe accuracy. These metrics
measure whether a system preserves not only the
current answer, but also the prior state, provenance
and update sequence behind that answer.
Retrieval and evidence-integration metrics.
For retrieval-based diagnostic baselines, we com-
pare retrieved-context performance against full-
context reading. Let AccFC denote full-context
accuracy and let Accr denote the accuracy of a


Metric
Oracle RAG
(diag.)
Full-context
Mem0
Graphiti
LangMem
Cognee
A-MEM
MemoryOS
Naive
RAG
Time-aware
RAG
Overall
[95% CI]
93.3
[89.7, 96.4]
88.8
[84.4, 92.9]
41.5
[35.7, 46.9]
62.5
[55.8, 68.8]
65.2
[57.6, 72.3]
81.7
[76.3, 86.6]
88.4
[83.9, 92.4]
60.3
[53.6, 66.5]
68.3
[60.3, 76.3]
68.8
[61.2, 75.9]
Table 1: Overall behavioral performance across references, incremental memory systems and retrieval baselines.
retrieval-based condition r. We define ∆FC(r) =
AccFC −Accr, and RAGnorm(r) =
Accr
AccFC . Here,
∆FC measures the performance loss relative to full
evidence, while RAGnorm measures the fraction of
full-context performance recovered by retrieved ev-
idence. Values above 1 are possible for diagnostic
evidence-selection baselines such as Oracle RAG,
because they remove filler and near-miss sessions
and provide only clean evidence.
For split-perturbation episodes, where relevant
evidence is distributed across sessions, we define
∆split = Accsplit −Accnon-split. Negative values
therefore indicate a split penalty, while positive val-
ues indicate better performance on split episodes.
Failure attribution.
Incorrect predictions are as-
signed to diagnostic failure categories based on the
structured scores described in App. C.2. Retrieval-
based systems may fail because relevant evidence
is missing, only part of a split perturbation is re-
trieved, or the reader misinterprets retrieved evi-
dence. Incremental systems may fail by missing
valid updates, over-updating on weak evidence,
overwriting historical values, losing source infor-
mation, or retrieving the wrong memory at query
time. These categories are reported separately from
aggregate accuracy.
5
Results and Analysis
All incremental memory systems are evaluated with
a shared protocol: each episode uses a fresh mem-
ory store, sessions are ingested sequentially, re-
trieved/extracted memory is passed to a unified
Gemini-3-Flash reader, and answers are scored us-
ing the same structured JSON scorer. §5.4 veri-
fies that the resulting profiles do not depend on
which reader is used. For systems requiring an
internal LLM for extraction, we use Gemini-2.5-
Flash when configurable. The LLM-selection ratio-
nale and full implementation details are provided
in App. A.
5.1
Overall Memory-System Performance
Table 1 provides a coarse entry point into system
behavior. We report overall accuracy to summarize
performance, but do not treat it as the final evalu-
ation criterion. We separate diagnostic references
from real memory systems. Among incremental
memory systems, A-MEM performs best, reaching
88.4% overall accuracy and nearly matching the
Full-context upper reference at 88.8%. Cognee
ranks second with 81.7% overall accuracy, fol-
lowed by LangMem, Graphiti, and MemoryOS in
the middle range.
A-MEM
Cognee
Naïve RAG
LangMem
Graphiti
MemoryOS
Mem0
Full-context
Oracle RAG
current_value
previous_value
change_detection
source
conflict_value
temporal
0
20
40
60
100
Accuracy(%)
80
Figure 4: Probe-level performance across systems.
Many systems perform well on current-value, previous-
value and change-detection probes, but degrade on
source, conflict-value and temporal probes.
Figure 4 further decomposes performance by
probe type (Probe definitions are provided in
App. C.1). Most systems perform better on current-
value, previous-value, and change-detection probes
than on source, conflict-value, and temporal probes.
This suggests that many memory systems can retain
or retrieve factual values, but often fail to preserve
provenance and update-sequence information.
These aggregate scores provide only a coarse
summary. As the following sections show, systems
with similar overall accuracy can differ sharply in
their update tendencies, historical retention, prove-
nance preservation, temporal reasoning, and robust-
ness to split evidence. We therefore decompose the
results into stability–plasticity profiles, paradigm-
wise behavior, and failure modes below.
5.2
Stability–Plasticity Profiles
Aggregate accuracy alone cannot distinguish sys-
tems that update too aggressively from systems
that preserve outdated memories too strongly. We
therefore compare systems by plasticity, stability


and the corresponding condition-level error rates.
Plasticity measures whether a system accepts valid
updates, while stability measures whether it resists
weak or unreliable evidence.
System
Plast. Stab. SP-Bal PreserveErr. UpdateErr.
Mem0
28.6
54.5
37.5
45.5
71.4
Graphiti
58.9
66.1
62.3
33.9
41.1
LangMem
63.4
67.0
65.1
33.0
36.6
Cognee
75.0
88.4
81.1
11.6
25.0
A-MEM
91.1
85.7
88.3
14.3
8.9
MemoryOS
54.5
66.1
59.7
33.9
45.5
Table 2: Stability–plasticity metrics for incremental
memory systems.
0
10
20
30
40
50
50
10
20
30
40
60
70
Preservation-condition error (%)
Update-condition error (%)
A-MEM
Cognee
Naïve RAG
Time-aware 
RAG
LangMem
Graphiti
MemoryOS
Mem0
80
Figure 5: Stability–plasticity plane. Systems closer to
the lower-left corner have better SP-balance.
Table 2 reports the stability–plasticity metrics.
A-MEM has the best balance among memory sys-
tems, with 91.1% plasticity, 85.7% stability, and
an SP-Balance of 88.3%. Cognee is more stability-
biased: it achieves the highest stability at 88.4%,
but lower plasticity at 75.0%.
LangMem and
Graphiti occupy a middle region with different be-
haviors: LangMem consolidates aggressively and
loses history, while Graphiti retains historical val-
ues but struggles to update and preserve source
information.
Figure 5 plots systems in the stability–plasticity
plane. The ideal region is the lower-left corner,
where errors are low under both conditions. A-
MEM is closest to this region. Cognee is also
strong but more conservative, with fewer errors
when preservation is required and more when an
update is required. Mem0 lies in the least desirable
region.
The three mid-range systems (Graphiti, Lang-
Mem, MemoryOS) are statistically indistinguish-
able in overall accuracy (all pairwise p > 0.37),
and thus directly fall into the “same accuracy”
condition.
But their behavior differs once cor-
rectness is decomposed by probe type. Graphiti
preserves historical values far better than Lang-
Mem (previous-value 96.4 vs.
67.9, 95% CI
[+9.1, +48.3], p = 0.002), a gap that survives
Bonferroni correction across all 18 system–probe
comparisons, while the current-value gap runs
in the opposite direction (66.1 vs.
80.4, ∆=
−14.3pp). Two systems with the same aggregate
score therefore realize opposite maintenance strate-
gies: one biased toward retaining the past, the other
toward tracking the present.
These results illustrate the central motivation of
MEMPROBE: final accuracy alone cannot reveal
whether a memory system is over-plastic, over-
stable or balanced.
5.3
Paradigm-wise Analysis
We next analyze system behavior across the four
MEMPROBE paradigms. Each paradigm contains
14 episodes and 56 scored probes. Table 3 reports
paradigm-wise accuracy.
Several patterns emerge. First, interference is
the hardest paradigm for the strongest references:
Full-context reaches 82.1%, A-MEM 82.1%, and
Oracle RAG 89.3%. This suggests that competing
similar facts stress memory behavior even when
clean evidence is available. Second, consolidation
sharply separates systems. A-MEM reaches 96.4%,
and Graphiti achieves its best paradigm score at
75.0%, suggesting that note-based and graph-based
structures help retain accumulated evidence. Mem0
performs less well on consolidation in our setting,
suggesting that repeated reinforcement is not al-
ways preserved by flat extracted-memory represen-
tations. Third, MemoryOS shows a different pat-
tern from most other systems: it performs best on
interference but worst on misinformation and con-
solidation. This suggests that its heat-promotion
mechanism may keep recent or competing items
accessible while failing to preserve reinforced his-
tory. Finally, misinformation favors systems that
preserve raw or well-attributed evidence. Retrieval-
style access performs relatively well, A-MEM and
Cognee remain strong. In contrast, systems that
aggressively extract, merge or rewrite memories
often blur provenance during memory construction.
App. D further reports how much independent sig-
nal each decomposition axis carries.


System
Interference
Misinformation
Consolidation
Reconsolidation
Overall
Oracle RAG (diag.)
89.3
92.9
98.2
92.9
93.3
Full-context
82.1
91.1
91.1
91.1
88.8
Mem0
41.1
46.4
33.9
44.6
41.5
Graphiti
53.6
60.7
75.0
60.7
62.5
LangMem
60.7
66.1
69.6
64.3
65.2
Cognee
80.4
80.4
85.7
80.4
81.7
A-MEM
82.1
85.7
96.4
89.3
88.4
MemoryOS
66.1
55.4
57.1
62.5
60.3
Naive RAG
67.9
75.0
60.7
69.6
68.3
Time-aware RAG
67.9
73.2
66.1
67.9
68.8
Table 3: Paradigm-wise accuracy across the four paradigms. Interference is difficult even for strong references,
while consolidation sharply separates structured memory systems from flatter extraction or retrieval systems.
5.4
Reader Ablation
To check whether the profiles reflect the memory
representation rather than the reader’s ability to
interpret it, we re-ran all six memory systems on
the same stored memories with a second reader,
Qwen3-32B, drawn from a different model family
than both the main reader (Gemini) and the genera-
tor (GPT) used for dialogue surface form. So any
difference is attributable to the reader alone.
System
Gemini
Qwen3
A-MEM
88.4
72.8
Cognee
81.7
68.3
LangMem
65.2
60.3
Graphiti
62.5
61.6
MemoryOS
60.3
51.8
Mem0
41.5
41.5
Table 4: Reader ablation. The same stored memories are
answered by two readers from different model families.
Absolute scores drop under the weaker reader, but the
ordering is largely preserved.
Absolute scores drop under Qwen3-32B, which
is expected given its weaker source and conflict-
status accuracy (Table 4).
However, the order-
ing is essentially unchanged (Spearman ρ = 0.94,
Kendall τ = 0.87). The single exception is Lang-
Mem and Graphiti, which swap positions, whose
aggregate scores are statistically indistinguishable
(§5.2), and whose order is therefore not expected
to be stable under any perturbation.
A reader with weaker provenance reasoning low-
ers every system’s score, but it does not change
which system retains more provenance than another.
The behavioral profiles reported here are therefore
properties of the maintained memory rather than
artifacts of the selected reader. Full cross-reader
results are given in App. E.5.
5.5
Failure Taxonomy
MEMPROBE is designed to identify not only
whether a system fails, but how it fails. We there-
fore group errors into several recurring failure
modes: provenance loss, temporal reconstruction
failure, distributed-evidence retrieval miss, histor-
ical overwrite, under-update, over-update, and ex-
traction fragility.
System
Hist.
Source
Temp.
Oracle RAG (diag.)
100.0
75.8
77.0
Full-context
100.0
66.1
77.0
Mem0
71.0
17.7
36.0
Graphiti (Zep)
96.0
41.9
45.0
LangMem
68.0
46.8
41.0
Cognee
96.0
64.5
73.0
A-MEM
100.0
64.5
68.0
MemoryOS
89.0
33.9
55.0
Naive RAG
75.0
64.5
45.0
Time-aware RAG
86.0
59.7
45.0
Table 5: Historical, source and temporal fidelity across
systems
The sharpest systematic failure is provenance
loss. This indicates that these memory systems can
store values but often fail to retain who introduced
them, whether they were accepted and whether they
applied to the target fact. This could in principle re-
flect a reader that fails to recover provenance rather
than a memory that fails to retain it. Two observa-
tions separate the two. First, as shown in Table 5,
Full-context uses the same reader on complete evi-
dence and reaches 66.1%, so part of the difficulty
is inherent to source recovery. But systems fall
far below this same-reader ceiling (Graphiti 41.9%,
Mem0 17.7%), and a gap of this size under an iden-
tical reader cannot be a read-out artifact. Second,
we manually inspected every source error and la-
beled it as a storage-side loss (provenance absent


from the retrieved memory, unrecoverable by any
reader) or a read-out failure (provenance present
but not recovered). As shown in Table 6, read-out
errors are roughly constant across systems (6–9),
so the reader does not explain the large differences
in source fidelity. What varies is storage-side loss,
which grows as systems retain less of the original
context. Temporal fidelity is also weak: most mem-
System
Read-out
Storage-side
A-MEM
6
2
Cognee
9
1
LangMem
9
10
Graphiti
8
11
MemoryOS
9
13
Mem0
7
20
Table 6: Manual classification of source-probe errors.
Systems are ordered by how much of the original con-
text they preserve for the reader. Read-out errors are
roughly constant, whereas storage-side losses grow as
systems compress memory more aggressively.
ory systems fall below the Full-context temporal
score of 77%, suggesting that they do not reliably
reconstruct update order, trigger and reason.
Another clear failure mode appears in the
split-perturbation setting, where the update trig-
ger/source and the accepted current value are
placed in separate sessions. Solving such episodes
requires retrieving and integrating both perturba-
tion parts, rather than finding a single decisive up-
date sentence. In Table 7, Time-aware RAG adds
true temporal position labels to retrieved sessions,
but improves only marginally over Naive RAG:
68.8% overall versus 68.3%, and 33.3% split accu-
racy versus 29.2%. Split current-value (Split CV)
and change-detection (Split CD) accuracy remain
stuck at 8.3% for both Naive and Time-aware RAG.
This shows that the problem is not missing tempo-
ral order information.
In contrast, Oracle RAG reaches 93.3% overall
and 89.6% on split episodes. Its split current-value
accuracy is 91.7%, and its split change-detection
accuracy is 100%. Since Oracle RAG uses the same
reader but receives clean non-filler evidence, the
gap between Naive RAG and Oracle RAG isolates
retrieval failure as the main bottleneck. In other
words, split failures occur because the retriever
often fails to recover both perturbation parts, not
because the reader cannot reason over the evidence.
Finally, Figure 6 summarizes split penalties
across systems. Most systems degrade when evi-
dence is distributed across sessions. MemoryOS is
Metric
Naive
RAG
Time-aware
RAG
Oracle
RAG
Full-context
∆FC
20.5
20.0
-4.5
–
RAGnorm
0.769
0.775
1.051
–
Non-split
79.0
78.4
94.3
90.9
Split
29.2
33.3
89.6
81.2
Split CV
8.3
8.3
91.7
66.7
Split CD
8.3
8.3
100.0
91.7
Table 7: Diagnostic RAG ablation for split-perturbation
episodes. ∆FC measures the loss relative to full-context
reading, and RAGnorm measures the fraction of full-
context performance recovered by retrieved evidence.
Split CV denotes current-value accuracy, and Split CD
denotes change-detection accuracy.
the only system with a positive split delta, but this
should be interpreted cautiously because the split
subset contains fewer source and conflict probes,
which are its weakest categories. Overall, the split
results show that distributed evidence integration
remains a major weakness for retrieval-based and
incremental memory systems.
0
10
-20
-30
-40
-50
∆Split: Split – Non-split (%)
-10
A-MEM
Cognee
Naïve RAG
Time-aware RAG
LangMem
Graphiti
MemoryOS
Mem0
Full-context
Oracle RAG
-49.8
-45.1
-29.0
-24.6
-13.9
-13.3
-9.7
-6.5
-4.7
+15.5
Figure 6: Split penalty/gain by systems. Negative val-
ues indicate that performance drops when perturbation
evidence is distributed across sessions.
6
Discussion and Conclusion
MEMPROBE provides a cognitive-style diagnostic
framework for evaluating agent memory systems
beyond aggregate final-answer accuracy. By or-
ganizing memory evaluation around interference,
misinformation, consolidation, and reconsolidation
paradigms, MEMPROBE exposes how systems bal-
ance stability and plasticity under controlled update
and preservation conditions.
MEMPROBE is not intended to be an exhaustive
leaderboard. Our current suite is a compact instanti-
ation of the proposed paradigm specifications, and
future work can instantiate the same trial structure
in other domains, modalities and real user histo-
ries. Nevertheless, the framework demonstrates
that agent memory evaluation should move from
asking only whether a system answers correctly


to asking how it updates, preserves and distorts
information over time.
Limitations
MEMPROBE is a diagnostic framework rather than
an exhaustive benchmark. While our new gener-
ated suite demonstrates that the paradigm specifi-
cations can be systematically scaled beyond the 56-
episode reference suite, the current evaluation still
covers only a limited range of domains, languages,
user histories and deployment settings. We use a
unified reader and structured scoring protocol to
enable controlled comparison across systems, and
additional analysis suggests that the main findings
are not driven by this choice, although native end-
to-end deployments may differ. Finally, because
part of the dialogue surface form is generated with
LLM, the suite may still contain generator-specific
biases in wording, scenario realization, or interac-
tion style.
References
Jean M Barnes and Benton J Underwood. 1959. " fate"
of first-list associations in transfer theory. Journal of
experimental psychology, 58(2):97.
Tyler
Barnes.
2026.
Announcing
observa-
tional
memory.
https://mastra.ai/blog/
observational-memory. Mastra Blog. Accessed:
2026-05-24.
Haonan Bian, Zhiyuan Yao, Sen Hu, Zishan Xu, Shaolei
Zhang, Yifu Guo, Ziliang Yang, Xueran Han, Huacan
Wang, and Ronghao Chen. 2026. Realmem: Bench-
marking llms in real-world memory-driven interac-
tion. Preprint, arXiv:2601.06966.
Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet
Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. 2025. Mem0: Building
production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term
memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413.
Jacek De˛ebiec, Valérie Doyère, Karim Nader, and
Joseph E LeDoux. 2006. Directly reactivated, but not
indirectly reactivated, memories undergo reconsoli-
dation in the amygdala. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 103(9):3428–3433.
Hermann Ebbinghaus. 1913. Memory: A Contribution
to Experimental Psychology. Teachers College Press.
Jizhan Fang, Xinle Deng, Haoming Xu, Ziyan Jiang,
Yuqi Tang, Ziwen Xu, Shumin Deng, Yunzhi Yao,
Mengru Wang, Shuofei Qiao, Huajun Chen, and
Ningyu Zhang. 2026. Lightmem: Lightweight and
efficient memory-augmented generation. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
volume 2026, pages 98706–98729.
Zexue He, Yu Wang, Churan Zhi, Yuanzhe Hu, Tzu-
Ping Chen, Lang Yin, Ze Chen, Tong Arthur Wu, Siru
Ouyang, Zihan Wang, Jiaxin Pei, Julian McAuley,
Yejin Choi, and Alex Pentland. 2026.
Memo-
ryarena:
Benchmarking agent memory in inter-
dependent multi-session agentic tasks.
Preprint,
arXiv:2602.16313.
Chuanrui Hu, Tong Li, Xingze Gao, Hongda Chen,
Yi Bai, Dannong Xu, Tianwei Lin, Xiaohong Li, Yun-
yun Han, Jian Pei, and Yafeng Deng. 2026a. Evaluat-
ing long-horizon memory for multi-party collabora-
tive dialogues. Preprint, arXiv:2602.01313.
Yuanzhe Hu, Yu Wang, and Julian McAuley. 2026b.
Evaluating memory in llm agents via incremental
multi-turn interactions. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, volume 2026, pages
156259–156291.
Jiazheng Kang, Mingming Ji, Zhe Zhao, and Ting
Bai. 2025.
Memory os of ai agent.
Preprint,
arXiv:2506.06326.
Chris Latimer, Nicoló Boschi, Andrew Neeser, Chris
Bartholomew, Gaurav Srivastava, Xuan Wang, and
Naren Ramakrishnan. 2025.
Hindsight is 20/20:
Building agent memory that retains, recalls, and re-
flects. Preprint, arXiv:2512.12818.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-
rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-
täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020.
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-
intensive nlp tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th Inter-
national Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran
Associates Inc.
Jiaqi Liu, Yaofeng Su, Peng Xia, Yiyang Zhou, Si-
wei Han, Zeyu Zheng, Cihang Xie, Mingyu Ding,
and Huaxiu Yao. 2026.
Simplemem:
Efficient
lifelong memory for llm agents.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.02553.
Elizabeth F Loftus. 1975. Leading questions and the
eyewitness report. Cognitive psychology, 7(4):560–
572.
Elizabeth F Loftus and John C Palmer. 1974.
Re-
construction of automobile destruction: An exam-
ple of the interaction between language and mem-
ory. Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior,
13(5):585–589.
Adyasha Maharana, Dong-Ho Lee, Sergey Tulyakov,
Mohit Bansal, Francesco Barbieri, and Yuwei
Fang. 2024.
Evaluating very long-term conver-
sational memory of llm agents.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.17753.
Vasilije Markovic, Lazar Obradovic, Laszlo Hajdu, and
Jovan Pavlovic. 2025. Optimizing the interface be-
tween knowledge graphs and llms for complex rea-
soning. Preprint, arXiv:2505.24478.


James L McClelland, Bruce L McNaughton, and Ran-
dall C O’Reilly. 1995. Why there are complementary
learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex:
insights from the successes and failures of connec-
tionist models of learning and memory. Psychologi-
cal review, 102(3):419.
Maria H Milekic and Cristina M Alberini. 2002. Tempo-
rally graded requirement for protein synthesis follow-
ing memory reactivation. Neuron, 36(3):521–525.
Karim Nader, Glenn E Schafe, and Joseph E Le Doux.
2000. Fear memories require protein synthesis in the
amygdala for reconsolidation after retrieval. Nature,
406(6797):722–726.
Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang,
Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez.
2024. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems.
Preprint, arXiv:2310.08560.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai,
Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S.
Bernstein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simu-
lacra of human behavior. In In the 36th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technol-
ogy (UIST ’23), UIST ’23, New York, NY, USA.
Association for Computing Machinery.
Preston Rasmussen, Pavlo Paliychuk, Travis Beauvais,
Jack Ryan, and Daniel Chalef. 2025. Zep: A tempo-
ral knowledge graph architecture for agent memory.
Preprint, arXiv:2501.13956.
Samarth Sarin, Lovepreet Singh, Bhaskarjit Sarmah,
and Dhagash Mehta. 2025. Memoria: A scalable
agentic memory framework for personalized conver-
sational ai. Preprint, arXiv:2512.12686.
Daniela Schiller, Marie-H Monfils, Candace M Raio,
David C Johnson, Joseph E LeDoux, and Elizabeth A
Phelps. 2010. Preventing the return of fear in humans
using reconsolidation update mechanisms. Nature,
463(7277):49–53.
Jason
Sosa.
2026.
Why
i
built
memo-
rystress.
https://omegamax.co/blog/
why-we-built-memorystress.
Accessed: 2026-
05-13.
Haoran Tan, Zeyu Zhang, Chen Ma, Xu Chen, Quanyu
Dai, and Zhenhua Dong. 2025a. Membench: To-
wards more comprehensive evaluation on the memory
of llm-based agents. Preprint, arXiv:2506.21605.
Zhen Tan, Jun Yan, I-Hung Hsu, Rujun Han, Zifeng
Wang, Long Le, Yiwen Song, Yanfei Chen, Hamid
Palangi, George Lee, Anand Rajan Iyer, Tianlong
Chen, Huan Liu, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister.
2025b. In prospect and retrospect: Reflective mem-
ory management for long-term personalized dialogue
agents. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 8416–8439, Vienna,
Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhen Tao, Jinxiang Zhao, Peng Liu, Dinghao Xi, Yan-
fang Chen, Wei Xu, and Zhiyu Li. 2026. Memcon-
flict: Evaluating long-term memory systems under
memory conflicts. Preprint, arXiv:2605.20926.
The LangChain Team. 2025. Langmem sdk for agent
long-term memory. https://www.langchain.com/
blog/langmem-sdk-launch. Accessed: 2026-05-
13.
Benton J Underwood. 1957. Interference and forgetting.
Psychological review, 64(1):49.
Yuyao Wang, Zhongjian Zhang, Mo Chi, Kaichi Yu,
Yuhan Li, Miao Peng, Bing Tong, Chen Zhang, Yan
Zhou, and Jia Li. 2026. Evomembench: Benchmark-
ing agent memory from a self-evolving perspective.
Preprint, arXiv:2605.18421.
Di Wu, Hongwei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Yuwei Zhang,
Kai-Wei Chang, and Dong Yu. 2024. Longmemeval:
Benchmarking chat assistants on long-term interac-
tive memory.
Wujiang Xu, Zujie Liang, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Juntao
Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2025. A-mem: Agen-
tic memory for llm agents. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems.
Sikuan Yan, Xiufeng Yang, Zuchao Huang, Ercong
Nie, Zifeng Ding, Zonggen Li, Xiaowen Ma, Jinhe
Bi, Kristian Kersting, Jeff Z. Pan, Hinrich Schütze,
Volker Tresp, and Yunpu Ma. 2026. Memory-r1:
Enhancing large language model agents to manage
and utilize memories via reinforcement learning.
Preprint, arXiv:2508.19828.
Yi Yu, Liuyi Yao, Yuexiang Xie, Qingquan Tan, Ji-
aqi Feng, Yaliang Li, and Libing Wu. 2026. Agen-
tic memory: Learning unified long-term and short-
term memory management for large language model
agents. Preprint, arXiv:2601.01885.
Yujie Zhao, Boqin Yuan, Junbo Huang, Haocheng Yuan,
Zhongming Yu, Haozhou Xu, Lanxiang Hu, Abhilash
Shankarampeta, Zimeng Huang, Wentao Ni, Yuan-
dong Tian, and Jishen Zhao. 2026. Ama-bench: Eval-
uating long-horizon memory for agentic applications.
Preprint, arXiv:2602.22769.
Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and
Yanlin Wang. 2024. Memorybank: Enhancing large
language models with long-term memory. In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelli-
gence, volume 38, pages 19724–19731.


A
Implementation and Reproducibility
Details
A.1
Code and Data Availability
We provide a complete reproducibility package in
our Github (https://github.com/jq-ding/MemProbe).
The archive includes all code used to generate and
validate the demonstration suite, the full 56-episode
dataset and latent specifications, the runner scripts
for all evaluated memory systems, raw model out-
puts, computed metrics, result tables, and analysis
scripts. It also contains detailed implementation
notes documenting environment setup, model con-
figurations, system-specific adaptations, excluded
systems, and troubleshooting details. In addition,
we include instructions for constructing customized
MEMPROBE suites, including how to define new
fact types, create latent specifications, generate dia-
logues, validate gold labels, and evaluate memory
systems under the same protocol.
A.2
Environment and Model Configuration
The
main
environment
used
a
unified
Gemini-based
evaluation
stack.
We
used
gemini-3-flash-preview as the final reader for
all systems and gemini-2.5-flash as the internal
LLM for memory extraction, consolidation, graph
construction, or memory promotion whenever a
system required an LLM component and allowed
this configuration. When a system required embed-
dings, we used the system-supported embedding
backend; for Gemini-compatible systems, we used
gemini-embedding-001.
For systems relying
on local sentence-transformer embeddings, we
used the default or recommended local embedding
model.
Model-selection rationale.
We use Gemini-3-
Flash as the primary reader rather than a GPT-
family model because a substantial portion of the
demonstration-suite dialogue text was generated
with GPT-5.4 assistance, although the latent speci-
fications, gold labels, and validation checks were
manually reviewed. Using a non-GPT reader re-
duces generator and reader coupling in the main
evaluation. We also ran cross-model validation
with GPT-5.4, Gemini-3-Flash, and Qwen3-32B
(App. E.5). The qualitative diagnostic patterns
were consistent across models, but Qwen3-32B
was weaker on source attribution and conflict-status
fields, making it less appropriate as the default
reader. We therefore select Gemini-3-Flash as a
strong independent reader. For internal memory
operations, we use Gemini-2.5-Flash when config-
urable because it is supported by most evaluated
systems, provides stable structured extraction, and
avoids the extra runtime and output-budget compli-
cations associated with thinking-mode models.
The main goal of this configuration was to make
final answering comparable across memory sys-
tems. Each system was allowed to use its own
memory mechanism, but probe answering was stan-
dardized through the same reader and structured
scorer.
A.3
Common Evaluation Protocol
All incremental memory systems were evaluated
under the same session-by-session protocol. For
each episode, we created a fresh isolated memory
store, fed the episode sessions in chronological
order, retrieved the system’s memory or context at
probe time, and then asked the unified reader to
answer the probe using that context.
Formally, for each episode, the evaluation fol-
lowed:
1. Reset or create a fresh memory store.
2. Ingest sessions sequentially in their original
order.
3. For each probe, retrieve memory/context from
the system rather than giving the full episode.
4. Pass the retrieved memory/context to the uni-
fied reader.
5. Score the structured answer using the same
typed-field scorer.
Whenever a memory system exposed a context-
only retrieval interface, we used it instead of the
system’s own final answer generation. This ensures
that differences in final answers primarily reflect
the retrieved or maintained memory rather than
differences in the answer generator. If a system did
not expose a clean retrieval interface, we treated it
as an end-to-end memory system and documented
this separately.
A.4
Evaluated Systems
We successfully evaluated six incremental memory
systems:
• Mem0, representing extraction-based long-
term memory.


• LangMem, representing framework-level
memory extraction and consolidation.
• Graphiti/Zep,
representing
temporal
knowledge-graph memory.
• Cognee, representing graph-vector hybrid
memory.
• A-MEM, representing agentic self-organizing
memory.
• MemoryOS,
representing
hierarchical
memory-OS style memory.
We also evaluated retrieval-based diagnostic
baselines, including Naive RAG, Time-aware RAG,
and Oracle RAG. Naive RAG retrieves top-ranked
sessions for each probe.
Time-aware RAG ad-
ditionally annotates retrieved sessions with their
original temporal position. Oracle RAG bypasses
retrieval and supplies clean non-filler evidence ses-
sions, serving as a diagnostic upper bound rather
than a deployable baseline.
A.5
Systems Considered but Excluded
We attempted to evaluate several additional mem-
ory systems but excluded them due to implementa-
tion or protocol incompatibilities.
• MemGPT (Packer et al., 2024) was excluded
because the available implementation required
a different version of python/server setup and
its tool-based memory mechanism was incom-
patible with our Gemini-controlled function-
calling protocol.
• Hindsight (Latimer et al., 2025) was excluded
due to database and system dependency con-
straints, including PostgreSQL/pgvector and
glibc incompatibilities in our environment.
• Memory-R1 (Yan et al., 2026) was excluded
because a runnable implementation was not
available at the time of our experiments, and
the method is an RL fine-tuning framework
rather than an inference-time memory system
compatible with our protocol.
• Memoria (Sarin et al., 2025) was excluded
due to dependency conflicts with the unified
reader stack and the absence of a clean fixed-
transcript ingestion API under our setting.
These exclusions do not change the goal of our
evaluation, which is to diagnose representative
memory mechanisms rather than exhaustively rank
all available systems. MEMPROBE is intended to di-
agnose representative memory mechanisms rather
than exhaustively rank all available memory prod-
ucts or research prototypes.
A.6
Artifacts
For reproducibility, we release the episode suite,
latent specifications, runner scripts, raw prediction
reports, metric computation scripts, and the full
implementation log. The full implementation log
contains exact versions, installation notes, system-
specific patches, runtime characteristics, and de-
tailed failure modes for excluded systems.
B
Demonstration Suite Details
Section 3 defines MEMPROBE as a set of diagnostic
paradigm specifications. This appendix describes
one concrete instantiation of these specifications: a
56-episode demonstration suite designed to evalu-
ate stability–plasticity behavior in agent memory
systems. The suite is not intended to exhaust all
possible memory scenarios. Rather, it serves as
a controlled and reproducible testbed for showing
how the MEMPROBE paradigms can be instanti-
ated, validated, and used to produce diagnostic
behavioral profiles.
B.1
Suite Overview
The demonstration suite contains 56 episodes,
1,246 ordered sessions, and 224 probe questions.
Each episode instantiates one of the four MEM-
PROBE paradigms: Interference, Misinformation,
Consolidation Strength, and Reconsolidation Win-
dow. Each episode contains an initial target mem-
ory, a controlled perturbation condition, naturalistic
filler interactions, and probes targeting different be-
havioral readouts.
Suite property
Value
Number of episodes
56
Number of sessions
1,246
Number of probes
224
Paradigms
4
Domains
Personal, Work, Agentic
Split-perturbation episodes
12
Non-split episodes
44
Probe types
Current, Previous, Change, Source, Conflict, Temporal
Table 8: Summary statistics of the 56-episode MEM-
PROBE demonstration suite.
The suite is balanced across the four diagnostic
paradigms, with 14 episodes per paradigm. We also


Domain
Example fact types
Personal
/
lifestyle
Current gym, dietary preference, coffee
preference, commute plan, routine pref-
erence
Work / pro-
ductivity
Submission deadline, project owner,
team standup time, deployment cadence,
review schedule
Agentic / tool-
state
Reported port number, active branch, se-
lected database, retry limit, configura-
tion value, tool-reported state
Table 9: Domains and representative fact types used in
the demonstration suite.
balance update-oriented and preserve-oriented con-
ditions so that simple strategies such as always up-
dating or always preserving cannot solve the suite.
In addition, the suite contains both local-evidence
episodes, where the relevant perturbation is con-
tained in a single interaction, and split-evidence
episodes, where the trigger and accepted new value
are distributed across multiple sessions.
The 56-episode suite is a reference instantia-
tion of MEMPROBE rather than the specification
itself. Other researchers may instantiate the same
paradigms with different domains, languages, in-
teraction styles, or memory systems, as long as
the controlled relation among the initial memory,
perturbation, expected behavior, and probes is pre-
served.
B.2
Domains and Fact Types
To avoid limiting evaluation to lifestyle preferences,
we instantiate the paradigms across three broad
domains: personal memory, work or productivity
memory, and agentic or tool-state memory. This
reflects the fact that modern agent memory systems
are used not only to remember user preferences, but
also to maintain project state, configuration values,
tool outputs, and task-specific commitments.
Each fact type is chosen to support both update
and preserve conditions. For example, a project
owner can change through a confirmed handoff,
but a teammate’s temporary involvement should
not be treated as an ownership transfer. Similarly, a
reported port number may be updated by an author-
itative deployment log, while a stale tool output
should not be accepted as the current state. These
distinctions allow similar surface values to play dif-
ferent roles depending on source, status, and target
applicability.
B.3
Construction Pipeline
The suite was constructed using a staged pipeline
that separates experimental design from surface
dialogue generation. This separation is important
because the main object of evaluation is not the
wording of any single episode, but the controlled
relationship between initial memory, perturbation,
expected behavior, and probes.
The construction pipeline consists of five stages:
1. Fact-type design. We manually define fact
types compatible with one or more MEM-
PROBE paradigms.
Each fact type must
support clear initial values, plausible up-
dates, plausible distractors, and unambiguous
current-state labels.
2. Value-pair design. For each fact type, we de-
fine initial values, candidate new values, dis-
tractors, and non-target values. Value pairs are
reviewed to avoid ambiguity, trivial templates,
and obvious shortcuts.
3. Latent specification. Each episode is first
represented as a structured latent specifica-
tion. The specification fixes the paradigm,
condition, expected behavior, canonical val-
ues, source type, support level, reactivation
status, and required probe types.
4. Dialogue generation. Dialogue sessions are
generated from the latent specification. Gener-
ation is constrained so that the target memory,
perturbation, fillers, and probes remain con-
sistent with the structured design. Some filler
interactions were adapted from or inspired
by public long-memory benchmark materials,
including LongMemEval (Wu et al., 2024),
LoCoMo (Maharana et al., 2024), and Mem-
oryArena (He et al., 2026), while the target
memory manipulations, perturbations, probes,
and gold labels were constructed according to
our MEMPROBE latent specifications.
5. Validation and cleanup. We apply rule-based
checks, structured gold checks, LLM-judge
consistency checks, Full-context reader vali-
dation, retrieval-based baselines, and heuristic
baselines. Episodes with schema inconsis-
tencies, ambiguous gold labels, or accidental
updates are revised.
This pipeline keeps the manipulated experimen-
tal variable separate from surface dialogue form.


It also makes the suite extensible: new domains
or fact types can be added by creating new latent
specifications that satisfy the same paradigm con-
straints.
B.4
Latent Specifications
Each episode is grounded in a latent specification
that records the controlled variables of the trial.
The latent specification is used both for generation
and for evaluation. It prevents the dialogue from
being treated as unstructured text and ensures that
each episode has a well-defined expected behavior.
Each latent specification contains the following
fields:
• Paradigm and condition: the MEMPROBE
paradigm and the specific condition being in-
stantiated, such as authoritative_update,
decoy_no_update,
assistant_noise,
stale_tool,
high_support_weak_challenge,
or
reactivated_weak_evidence.
• Expected behavior:
whether the system
should update the target memory or preserve
the existing memory.
• Canonical values: the initial value, accepted
new value if applicable, conflict value, distrac-
tor values, and previous value.
• Source and status: whether the perturbation
comes from the user, assistant, third party,
tool, stale tool output, or another entity.
• Support and reactivation variables: for con-
solidation and reconsolidation trials, the sup-
port level, evidence strength, and whether the
prior memory is explicitly reactivated.
• Split perturbation metadata: whether the
perturbation evidence is contained in one ses-
sion or split across multiple sessions.
• Structured gold: canonical answers for cur-
rent value, previous value, change status,
source, conflict status, and temporal sequence.
B.5
Dialogue and Perturbation Structure
Each episode consists of ordered sessions. Sessions
are assigned both a global index and a phase label.
The main phases are encoding, filler, perturbation,
post-perturbation context, and probing.
Encoding sessions establish the initial memory.
Filler sessions introduce natural background inter-
actions and near-miss facts. Confusable sessions
mention values that are semantically or lexically
similar to the target fact but should not determine
the gold answer. Perturbation sessions introduce
the critical update, conflict, weak evidence, or re-
activation. Post-perturbation sessions test whether
systems are overly sensitive to recency or surface
similarity.
A standard non-split episode follows the pattern:
Encoding →Filler →Perturbation
→Post-perturbation →Probing.
(6)
In split-perturbation episodes, the perturbation
is intentionally distributed:
Encoding →Filler →P1
→Interleaving filler →P2
→Post-perturbation →Probing.
(7)
Here, P1 may contain the source, trigger, or rea-
son for change, while P2 contains the accepted
current value or final decision. This design pre-
vents a retrieval system from solving the episode
by retrieving a single decisive update sentence. In-
stead, the system must integrate evidence across
multiple sessions.
Split perturbation is included to test distributed
evidence integration. In many real interactions, an
update is not expressed as a single sentence of the
form “the value changed from x to y.” A user may
first indicate that a plan has changed, then later
mention the accepted new value. Alternatively,
a tool may provide a trigger, while a user later
confirms how it should be interpreted.
The split design separates three pieces of infor-
mation that are often collapsed in simple bench-
marks:
• Change trigger: evidence that some update
or reconsideration occurred.
• Source or authority: who or what introduced
the relevant evidence.
• Accepted current value:
the value that
should be treated as current.
A system that only retrieves P1 may know that a
change occurred but fail to identify the new value.
A system that only retrieves P2 may identify the
new value but miss the trigger or source. A robust
memory system should connect these pieces of
evidence while preserving the previous state.


B.6
Structured Gold Labels
Each probe is paired with structured gold labels.
We avoid relying only on free-form textual answers
because many correct predictions differ in word-
ing. Structured gold fields specify the intended
answer at the level of value, source, status, target
applicability, and temporal relation.
For current-value probes, the gold label speci-
fies the accepted current value. For previous-value
probes, it specifies the earlier value that should re-
main historically accessible. For change-detection
probes, it specifies whether a confirmed change oc-
curred. For source probes, it specifies who or what
introduced the relevant evidence. For conflict-value
probes, it specifies the conflicting value, its source,
its status, and whether it applies to the target fact.
For temporal probes, it specifies the old-to-new di-
rection, trigger, reason, and whether an exact time
is required.
For example, a conflict gold label has the follow-
ing abstract structure:
{
"conflict_value": "...",
"mentioned": true,
"source": "...",
"status": "<not_accepted | stale |
other_entity | hypothetical>",
"applies_to_target": true or false,
"correct_current_value": "..."
}
Similarly, a temporal gold label has the follow-
ing structure:
{
"change_direction": "<old_to_new |
no_confirmed_change>",
"old_value": "...",
"new_value": "...",
"trigger": "...",
"reason": "...",
"exact_time_required": false
}
Structured labels make scoring more robust to
paraphrase and allow partial subscores. For ex-
ample, a system may identify the conflict value
but fail to classify whether it was accepted, stale,
hypothetical, or associated with another entity.
C
Probe Taxonomy and Scoring
This section describes the probe taxonomy and scor-
ing procedure used in MEMPROBE. The main text
reports aggregate and behavioral metrics, while
the details below specify how individual model re-
sponses are matched against structured gold labels.
C.1
Probe Types
MEMPROBE uses targeted probes as behavioral
readouts rather than ordinary question-answering
items. Each probe type isolates a different aspect
of memory behavior.
Current-value probes.
Current-value probes ask
for the currently valid value of the target fact. They
evaluate whether the system reaches the appropri-
ate final memory state after the episode, either by
accepting a valid update or preserving the original
value when no valid update occurred.
Previous-value probes.
Previous-value probes
ask for the earlier value after a change. They evalu-
ate whether historical information remains acces-
sible after an update, rather than being erased or
overwritten by the current value.
Change-detection
probes.
Change-detection
probes ask whether a real update occurred. They
distinguish systems that simply output a plausible
value from systems that recognize the update status
of a memory.
Source probes.
Source probes ask who or what
introduced a relevant value. They evaluate whether
the system preserves provenance information, such
as whether a value came from the user, an assistant
statement, a tool result, a retrieved document, or
another source.
Conflict-value probes.
Conflict-value probes ask
whether a competing value was mentioned, where
it came from, and whether it applied to the target
fact. They test whether the system distinguishes
valid evidence from distractors, stale information,
misinformation, or values belonging to another en-
tity.
Temporal probes.
Temporal probes ask about
the update sequence, including the original value,
current value, trigger, and reason for change. They
evaluate whether the system can reconstruct the
temporal structure behind a memory update, not
only the final state.
Together, these probes separate memory behav-
iors that would otherwise be collapsed by final-
answer accuracy. A system may recover the cur-
rent value but lose the previous value, detect that
a conflicting value was mentioned but misattribute


its source, or identify a change without correctly
explaining why the change occurred.
C.2
Scoring Procedure
We score six probe types: current value, previous
value, change detection, source, conflict value, and
temporal sequence.
Current-value scoring.
A current-value re-
sponse is correct if it identifies the accepted current
state of the target fact according to the episode gold
label.
Previous-value scoring.
A previous-value re-
sponse is correct if it recovers the earlier value after
an update. If no update occurred and the probe asks
for a previous value, the expected answer is deter-
mined by the episode label, such as “no previous
value” or the original value when the wording asks
for the initially established state.
Change-detection scoring.
A change-detection
response is correct if it correctly determines
whether a confirmed update occurred. This score
evaluates update-status recognition rather than
value extraction alone.
Source scoring.
A source response is correct if
it identifies the source associated with the relevant
value or update. Acceptable answers may include
normalized source categories such as user, assistant,
tool, document, third party, stale record, or other
entity, depending on the episode label.
Conflict-value scoring.
Conflict-value probes
are decomposed into multiple fields: value iden-
tification, source identification, status classifica-
tion, and target applicability. A response may re-
ceive partial credit if it identifies the competing
value but misclassifies whether that value was ac-
cepted, rejected, stale, hypothetical, unreliable, or
non-applicable to the target entity.
Temporal scoring.
Temporal probes are scored
using the old value, current value, update direc-
tion, trigger, and reason for change. Exact dates
or timestamps are required only when explicitly
specified by the gold label. Otherwise, a correct
response must capture the update sequence and the
event or source that triggered the change.
C.3
Normalization and Partial Credit
Before scoring, we normalize common surface vari-
ants that do not change meaning. For example,
optional prepositions in time expressions may be
ignored, and numeric values may be compared with
or without common units when the unit is unam-
biguous. For sentence-level predictions, we extract
candidate values when possible before comparison.
Partial credit is used only for structured probes
with multiple fields, such as conflict-value and tem-
poral probes. This prevents formatting differences
from being counted as semantic errors while pre-
serving important distinctions among value iden-
tification, source attribution, status classification,
and temporal reasoning.
C.4
Execution Errors and Exclusions
API failures, parsing failures, or execution errors
unrelated to episode content are marked separately
and excluded from the corresponding accuracy de-
nominators. These exclusions are not treated as
model reasoning errors. All exclusions are reported
in the validation tables associated with the experi-
ment.
D
Inter-Axis Correlation
MEMPROBE reports results along two decompo-
sition axes: the four cognitive paradigms and the
six probe types. A natural question is how much
independent signal each axis carries. Treating the
six memory systems as samples, we compute pair-
wise correlations between axes and summarize the
off-diagonal entries.
Pearson
Spearman
Axis
mean
min
mean
min
4 paradigms
0.93
0.85
0.88
0.77
6 probe types
0.78
0.43
0.75
0.43
Table 10: Off-diagonal correlation summary across the
two decomposition axes, computed over the six incre-
mental memory systems.
The paradigm axis is highly collinear: all twelve
off-diagonal correlations exceed 0.85, so a sys-
tem that is strong on one paradigm tends to be
strong on all four. Paradigm-level accuracy there-
fore largely reflects general competence rather than
four separable capabilities. This is expected, and
it is consistent with the role the paradigms play in
MEMPROBE: they construct mechanistically dis-
tinct controlled conditions under which memory
behavior can be observed, not four independent
scoring dimensions.
The probe-type axis is measurably less collinear.
Its minimum off-diagonal correlation (0.43) is well


below the paradigm minimum (0.85), indicating
that some probe types capture behavior the others
do not predict. Temporal fidelity is the clearest
case: it correlates only r = 0.64 with current-
value accuracy, so reconstructing the update se-
quence is substantially less correlated to reporting
the correct current value. Source fidelity, by con-
trast, correlates more strongly with current value
(r = 0.89), but this reflects a uniform deficit rather
than a shared capability: every system scores far
lower on source than on current value (Table 5).
The independent diagnostic signal in MEMPROBE
therefore comes primarily from decomposing cor-
rectness by probe type.
E
Suite Quality Control and Validation
We validate the suite at three levels: schema consis-
tency, gold-label consistency, and behavioral sanity
checks. The goal is to ensure that the episodes are
internally consistent, answerable under complete
evidence, and not solvable by trivial shortcuts.
E.1
Schema and Gold-Label Validation
All episodes are checked for required top-level
fields, latent-spec fields, session fields, and meta-
data fields. Each session has a session index, phase
label, session type, dialogue content, and metadata.
Split episodes explicitly record the number of per-
turbation sessions and the identities of perturbation
parts.
We use structured gold labels for all probe types
and manually audit cases where gold labels and
dialogue content disagree. We also normalize com-
mon value variants, such as optional prepositions
in time expressions and unit-bearing numeric val-
ues. This reduces false negatives caused by surface
mismatch rather than model error.
E.2
Probe-Level Validation
Table 11 reports validation accuracy by probe type.
High judge and Full-context scores indicate that
most gold labels are recoverable under complete
evidence. The lower RAG scores on current-value
and change-detection probes suggest that the suite
selectively stresses retrieval and evidence integra-
tion rather than merely increasing surface ambigu-
ity.
E.3
Behavioral Sanity Checks
We run several reference baselines before using
the suite to evaluate memory systems. A Full-
context reader checks whether the episode is solv-
Probe type
Judge
Full-context
Naive RAG
Current value
98.2%
96.4%
71.4%
Previous value
100.0%
100.0%
92.9%
Change detection
100.0%
94.6%
65.5%
Temporal
86.4%
85.7%
81.8%
Source
97.1%
97.1%
97.1%
Conflict value
100.0%
96.4%
100.0%
Table 11: Probe-level validation accuracy for the 56-
episode suite. Judge and Full-context scores are high
for most probe types, indicating that structured gold
labels are largely recoverable when all evidence is vis-
ible.
Naive RAG shows the largest degradation on
current-value and change-detection probes, suggesting
that retrieval-based systems struggle most when they
must identify the accepted current state and determine
whether a real update occurred.
able when all evidence is visible. A naive RAG
baseline checks whether retrieval and evidence inte-
gration are non-trivial. Heuristic baselines such as
latest-value, always-update, and always-preserve
test whether the suite can be solved by simple short-
cuts.
Table 12 summarizes the current validation re-
sults. The judge and Full-context reader indicate
that the episodes are largely readable and internally
consistent. The RAG gap and low heuristic scores
indicate that the suite is not solved by simple re-
trieval or recency shortcuts.
Baseline
Accuracy
LLM judge
97.8%
Full-context reader
95.5%
Naive RAG
81.2%
Latest-value heuristic
18.8%
FC–RAG gap
14.3 pp
Table 12: Validation results for the 56-episode demon-
stration suite. The judge and Full-context reader indi-
cate that the episodes are largely readable and internally
consistent, while the RAG gap and low heuristic score
indicate that the suite is not solved by simple retrieval
or recency shortcuts.
E.4
Split-Perturbation Validation
The split-perturbation subset provides an additional
diagnostic check.
Full-context performance re-
mains high on split episodes, indicating that these
episodes are still answerable when all evidence is
visible. However, naive RAG drops substantially
on split episodes, showing that retrieval systems
struggle when evidence is distributed across ses-
sions.


Subset
Judge
Full-context
Naive RAG
Split episodes
95.8%
93.6%
56.2%
Non-split episodes
98.3%
96.0%
88.0%
Table 13:
Split versus non-split validation results.
Split perturbations preserve Full-context readability but
sharply reduce RAG performance, indicating that they
diagnose distributed evidence integration rather than
simply making the text ambiguous.
Baseline
GPT-5.4
Gemini-3-Flash
Qwen3-32B
Judge
96.9
94.2
90.2
Full-context
92.4
88.8
78.1
Naive RAG
68.8
68.3
59.4
FC–RAG gap
23.6
20.5
18.7
Table 14: Cross-model validation summary under struc-
tured JSON scoring. All three readers show the same
qualitative trend: Full-context performance is substan-
tially higher than naive RAG, indicating that the suite
exposes retrieval and evidence-integration difficulty be-
yond Full-context readability.
E.5
Cross-model validation
To check whether the validation results depend
on a single reader model, we repeat the suite val-
idation with three readers: GPT-5.4, Gemini-3-
Flash, and Qwen3-32B. All models are evaluated
with the same structured JSON scoring protocol.
The probes remain natural-language questions, but
model responses are normalized into structured
fields before scoring. This reduces surface-form
bias across models while preserving the semantic
requirements of each probe.
Table 14 summarizes the overall results. All
three readers achieve high judge accuracy, indicat-
ing that the structured gold labels are largely re-
coverable across models. Full-context performance
is consistently higher than naive RAG, showing
that retrieval-based reading introduces a substan-
tial additional bottleneck. Qwen3-32B is weaker
overall, especially on source and conflict-status rea-
soning, but it preserves the same qualitative pattern:
Full-context reading outperforms naive RAG.
Table 15 breaks down Full-context performance
by probe type.
Across models, current-value,
previous-value, and change-detection probes are
consistently strong, showing that the core fac-
tual memory state is readable under full evidence.
The largest cross-model differences appear in
source and conflict-value probes.
Qwen3-32B
performs competitively on state-oriented probes
but drops sharply on provenance and conflict-
Probe type
GPT-5.4
Gemini-3-Flash
Qwen3-32B
Current value
96.4
92.9
94.6
Previous value
100.0
100.0
96.4
Change detection
96.4
98.2
94.6
Source
76.5
73.5
41.2
Conflict value
92.9
78.6
42.9
Temporal
86.4
77.3
72.7
Overall
92.4
88.8
78.1
Table 15: Full-context accuracy by probe type across
reader models. State-oriented probes are robust across
models, whereas source and conflict-value probes re-
veal larger differences, especially for Qwen3-32B. This
suggests that provenance and conflict-status reasoning
are more demanding than extracting current or previous
values.
status probes, suggesting that source attribution and
target-applicability classification are harder than
factual value extraction for weaker open-weight
readers.
Overall, the cross-model results support two con-
clusions. First, the suite is not specific to the GPT-
5.4 reader: Gemini-3-Flash and Qwen3-32B re-
cover the main factual memory states under full
context, and Gemini closely matches GPT-5.4 in
the overall validation pattern. Second, the split-
perturbation effect is robust, retrieval-based read-
ing fails much more severely on split episodes than
on non-split episodes, especially for probes that
require identifying the accepted current value or
detecting that a true update occurred. This vali-
dates split perturbation as a diagnostic stressor for
distributed evidence integration.
F
A Second Suite Instantiation
MEMPROBE is specified as a construction protocol
rather than a fixed dataset. To verify that the proto-
col is portable rather than tailored to the 56-episode
suite, we instantiated a second and independent
suite using the same five-stage pipeline (App. B)
and evaluated the same six memory systems on it.
F.1
Construction
The second suite contains 40 episodes, 10 per
paradigm, balanced across the same three domains.
Two properties make it an independent test of the
protocol rather than a re-wording of the original
suite. First, it uses 12 new fact types with no over-
lap with the original suite, extending the work and
agentic domains in particular. Second, dialogue
surface form was generated with a different gener-
ator model (Gemini-3.1-Pro), so the instantiation
does not inherit the wording conventions of the


original suite. As before, all controlled variables
(latent specifications, perturbations, expected be-
haviors and gold labels) were human-designed and
audited rather than generated.
F.2
Results
Because the second suite was generated with a
Gemini-family model, we report results under a
GPT-5.6 reader, keeping generation and reading in
different model families as in the main evaluation.
System
Interf. Misinf. Consol. Recons. Overall [95% CI]
A-MEM
97.5
89.5
97.3
97.5
95.5 [91.7, 98.7]
Cognee
86.5
92.1
92.5
94.6
91.4 [86.3, 96.1]
MemoryOS
84.6
76.9
68.4
80.0
77.6 [70.4, 84.3]
LangMem
82.5
70.3
86.8
63.2
75.8 [69.4, 82.6]
Graphiti
75.0
71.1
66.7
83.8
74.0 [66.4, 81.8]
Mem0
45.0
34.2
43.2
48.6
42.8 [36.7, 48.4]
Table 16: Paradigm-wise and overall accuracy on the
second suite. Confidence intervals are episode-level
bootstrap intervals over the 40 episodes.
The core diagnostic conclusions replicate. A-
MEM and Mem0 again occupy the top and bottom
of the ranking, and the source accuracy again falls
well below current-value accuracy for every system.
Absolute scores are higher than on the original
suite, which is consistent with the second suite
having shorter episodes and a stronger reader.
One difference is that MemoryOS ranks third
here but fifth on the original suite. The second
suite is weighted toward agentic, shorter-horizon
fact types, which suits MemoryOS’s hierarchi-
cal short/mid/long-term organization, whereas the
original suite contains longer episodes with more
competing-fact interference.
G
Limitations of the Demonstration Suite
The demonstration suite is LLM-assisted and inten-
tionally controlled. This improves interpretability
and validation, but does not capture the full di-
versity of real user logs. The covered domains
are representative rather than exhaustive, and the
suite does not include all possible uses of long-term
agent memory.
The current instantiation is also text-only and
English-only. It does not evaluate multimodal mem-
ory, multilingual interaction, or memory updates
grounded in long-running external environments.
These limitations motivate larger and noisier
instantiations rather than changing the role of
MEMPROBE.
Future work can instantiate the
same paradigm specifications in multilingual, mul-
timodal, user-derived, or application-specific set-
tings while preserving the controlled variables that
make stability–plasticity behavior measurable.
H
License and Artifact Usage
H.1
License
We use standard licenses from the community and
provide the following links to the licenses for the
datasets, codes, and models that we used in this
paper:
Mem0: Apache
Zep/Graphiti: Apache
LangMem: MIT
Cognee: Apache
A-MEM: MIT
MemoryOS: Apache
LoCoMo: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 Inter-
national
LongMemEval: MIT
MemoryArena: CC-BY-4.0
H.2
Artifact Usage
The use of existing artifacts is consistent with their
intended use in this work. We will make our code
and models publicly accessible and all created arti-
facts will be only for research purposes and should
not be used outside of research contexts.
H.3
AI Assistants Usage
We strictly follow the ARR rules in AI Assistants
usage and carefully check all the produced artifacts.
