Title: AMBER: Training Long-Horizon Web Agents through Append-Only Memory

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.07118v1

Published Time: Wed, 07 Oct 2026 00:16:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
Preprint 

# AMBER: T RAINING LONG -H ORIZON WEB AGENTS THROUGH APPEND -O NLY MEMORY 

Chinmay Savadikar 1,†,∗, Zhaoyu Zhang 2,†, Mingyu Zhao 2, Shuang Xie 2, Han Li 2,Tianfu Wu 1, Lingyun Wang 21North Carolina State University 2Shopify 

ABSTRACT 

Modern language-model agents increasingly interact with external environments over long-horizon, multi-step trajectories, where the accumulated interaction his-tory can quickly exceed practical context budgets. To ensure reliability, agents must maintain factual information over long horizons, remember execution errors and corrective feedback, and track progress across actions. Several approaches have been proposed to achieve this without the need for maintaining the entire ex-ecution history in context, such as using the reasoning and action history, learning to maintain a fixed-size memory through an overwrite mechanism, and periodic summarization. Although overwrite memory can in principle retain anything an append-only memory can, it must learn to carry each fact through every subse-quent rewrite, which is difficult to learn from sparse outcome rewards; for in-teractive applications like web agents, we find that trained overwrite memories delete key information required by the trajectory, as well as corrective feedback received from the environment. We introduce AMBER ( Append-only Memory 

Bank for Evidence Retention)—a simple and scalable framework where an agent jointly learns to reason, act, and write free-form memory, while an append-only rule guarantees retention by construction. This allows AMBER to be trained end-to-end with reinforcement learning from outcome rewards without the need for extensive curated SFT data. On WebArena Lite, AMBER improves average suc-cess over overwrite-based memory by 4.09 percentage points, increases the frac-tion of tasks solved in five repeated runs by 4.8 percentage points, and matches an overwrite baseline trained on substantially more expensive curated supervision. AMBER achieves these improvements while maintaining a practical token bud-get, providing a strong balance between context efficiency, task performance, and reliable long-horizon execution. Our code is available at https://github. com/agentic-foundation-modeling-research/amber .

1 INTRODUCTION 

Language models are increasingly used as agents that interact with external environments over long-horizon, multi-step trajectories, including web-based deep research (OpenAI, 2025), tool use (Yao et al., 2025), and browser navigation (M¨ uller & ˇ Zuniˇ c, 2024). Unlike single-turn tasks, the infor-mation required to complete these tasks is often discovered incrementally through interaction and exploration, and is not available upfront. An agent must therefore identify useful information from its observations, track its execution progress, and preserve relevant evidence until it is needed later. This raises a central question for long-horizon agents: once an agent has identified information worth remembering, how should that information be retained across subsequent interactions? 

The straightforward solution is to condition every decision on the complete interaction history, in-cluding previous observations, reasoning, and actions (Yao et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2025). However, this context grows throughout the trajectory and quickly becomes impractical when observations are large. Longer contexts can also make relevant information harder to retrieve reliably (Liu et al., 2024a). Web navigation makes this problem particularly demanding: an agent must collect facts across pages, plan and execute sequences of actions, track completed and pending subgoals, re-member failed attempts, recover from mistakes, and use information acquired many steps earlier. 

> *

Work done as part of internship at Shopify 

> †

Equal contribution Corresponding authors: {csavadi,tianfu wu }@ncsu.edu , lingyun.wang@shopify.com 

1arXiv:2610.07118v1 [cs.AI] 5 Oct 2026 Preprint To make long-horizon interaction efficient, practical context management strategies approximate the full interaction history using some form of compressed memory . For reliable execution, context management mechanisms must decide what information to write , what previously written informa-tion to retain , and what information to surface . Moreover, a useful memory mechanism should be robust to diverse environments and interaction settings. Several methods have been proposed to address this problem, such as retaining reasoning and action histories while discarding past obser-vations (Wei et al., 2025; Gandhi & Neubig, 2025), learning a compact memory that is recursively rewritten at each step (Zhou et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2026; Yuan et al., 2025), or using external memory and summarization mechanisms (Yan et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025). In this paper, we focus on the first two mechanisms, and show that reasoning and action history alone is not sufficient, and an ex-plicit memory is required for reliable long-horizon execution. However, when overwrite memory is trained from outcome rewards, the learned agents lose factual information and corrective feedback, and as a result repeat mistakes .We propose AMBER (Append-only Memory Bank for Evidence Retention), which separates the learned decision of what to write from what to retain . At each interaction step, the agent reasons, acts, and generates a free-form natural-language memory entry, which is appended to a persistent memory bank (Figure 1). The policy therefore learns what information is worth recording, while retention is determined by a simple append-only rule. We show that AMBER can be trained jointly to optimize reasoning, action and memory generation in a scalable manner with minimal supervised data followed by end-to-end reinforcement learning from outcome rewards. To ensure scalable training, we develop and describe a rollout architecture capable of large-scale rollouts. On WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024), AMBER improves the average task success rate over overwrite memory by 4.09 percentage points and increases the fraction of tasks solved in five repeated runs by 4.8 percentage points. We show that AMBER loses less information and repeats fewer execution errors. Moreover, overwrite memory matches AMBER’s performance only when trained on sub-stantially more expensive curated supervision. Together, these results suggest that the gap is one of learnability rather than capacity: the append-only prior makes durable memory easier to learn from weak outcome supervision. Environment Environment 

Figure 1: Overview of AMBER. At each step, the agent jointly reasons, acts, and generates a memory entry that is appended to a persistent memory bank provided as context to future steps. See text for details. Our contributions are summarized as follows, which es-tablish AMBER as a simple, scalable method for training long-horizon web agents that balances task performance, reliability, context efficiency and supervision complexity: • A retention-focused view of learned agent memory. 

We show that overwrite-style memory can result in loss of key factual information as well as corrective feed-back, resulting in agents failing to solve tasks and re-peating mistakes. • Append-only learned memory. We introduce AM-BER, which learns what information to record while using a deterministic append-only rule. We show that AMBER improves success rate, reliability, information retention, and shows better error correction ability than overwrite memory. While appending increases the con-text length in theory, we find that over trajectories in WebArena, the context length stays practical. • RL training, rollout architecture, modest supervi-sion. We show that AMBER can be trained in an end-to-end manner using reinforcement learning from out-come rewards. We further describe a scalable rollout infrastructure that enables this training. We show that while overwrite memory needs careful data curation for the initial SFT phase before RL, AMBER can achieve better performance without this extensive SFT, making it cheaper and easier to train. 

2 RELATED WORK 

Training Web Agents. LLM-based web agents combine language understanding, planning, and interface control to complete multi-step tasks (Yao et al., 2023), with benchmarks such as We-bArena (Zhou et al., 2024) providing functional evaluation on realistic, reproducible websites. Two 2Preprint major directions have emerged for training open models in these environments. The first constructs successful trajectories for supervised fine-tuning (SFT), for example by retroactively labeling ex-ploration (Murty et al., 2024), replaying tutorials (Xu et al., 2025), or framing exploration as graph search (Gandhi & Neubig, 2025). The second learns directly from the outcomes of online interac-tion, using approaches such as a self-evolving curriculum with an outcome reward model (Qi et al., 2025) or multi-turn reinforcement learning with binary task rewards (Wei et al., 2025). Vattikonda et al. (2025) study both approaches across web-agent post-training settings and find their combi-nation important for strong performance. These systems make coupled design choices along five axes: the observation representation, the context retained across interactions, the model family, the training strategy, and the evaluation environment. Because existing systems often vary several of these axes simultaneously, their results make it difficult to isolate the effect of the context-retention strategy. Our experiments vary only the retained context while holding the other four axes fixed. 

Memory for Long-Horizon Agents. We use trajectory memory to refer to information retained across steps of the same task. Several recent methods make such memory an explicit, learnable component of long-horizon reasoning, and they differ mainly in how much of the retention decision is left to the learned policy. Self-MAP augments conversational web navigation with memory and re-flection (Deng et al., 2024); MEM1 (Zhou et al., 2025) and MemSearcher (Yuan et al., 2025) jointly train reasoning and memory consolidation into a compact recurrent state; and MemAgent learns an overwrite memory for arbitrarily long segmented inputs (Yu et al., 2026). In these methods, whether a fact survives is decided by the policy at every rewrite. Other systems expose learned oper-ations over an external store. These include structured memory management trained with outcome rewards (Yan et al., 2025), insertion and deletion as policy actions (Zhang et al., 2025), periodic summarization of interaction history (Wu et al., 2025), and learned consolidation of web-search histories (Ye et al., 2025). These operations make memory more expressive, but they also enlarge what the policy must learn, often from sparse outcome rewards alone. AMBER takes the opposite approach: the policy learns only what to write, and retention is fixed by an append-only rule. 

3 BACKGROUND 

3.1 WEB INTERACTION AS A PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE MARKOV DECISION PROCESS 

We model web interaction as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) M =(S, A, P, R, Ω, O, γ ). At interaction step t, st ∈ S denotes the environment state, at ∈ A is the textual action sampled by the policy, P (st+1 | st, a t) describes the website and browser dynamics, 

Rt ∈ { 0, 1} is the scalar task reward, and γ is the discount factor. The agent receives an observation 

ot ∈ Ω, such as a screenshot, DOM representation, or accessibility tree, according to the observation function O(ot | st, a t−1).A straightforward approach to acting under partial observability is to condition the policy on the complete interaction history: 

Ht = ( o0, a 0, o 1, a 1, . . . , a t−1, o t), at ∼ πθ (· | Ht). (1) The policy is trained to maximize the expected discounted return 

J(θ) = Eτ ∼πθ

" TX

> t=0

γtRt

#

. (2) Modern LLM-based agents implement this using the ReAct framework (Yao et al., 2023), where an autoregressive LLM first generates chain-of-thought reasoning rt and then an action at:

(rt, a t) ∼ πθ (· | x, H t), (3) where x denotes the task (or goal) given to the agent, and both rt and at are expressed in natural language. The reasoning rt interprets the current page, tracks intermediate goals, and motivates the next action. Unlike at, it does not directly modify the environment, but instead conditions the environment-affecting action that follows. 3.2 COMPRESSING INTERACTION HISTORY 

Conditioning on the full history Ht preserves all information available to the agent at step t. In practice, however, retaining every past observation is prohibitively expensive: tokenized web obser-vations can be long, causing the interaction history to quickly exhaust the policy model’s context 3Preprint window. Web agents therefore replace the full history with a compact retained context Ct that car-ries information from previous steps. For Ct to serve as an effective substitute for Ht, the resulting policy should approximate the behavior of the full-history policy: 

πθ (· | x, o t, C t) ≈ πθ (· | x, H t). (4) Concretely, at step t, the policy receives the current observation ot together with the retained context 

Ct and generates the reasoning and action 

(rt, a t) ∼ πθ (· | x, o t, C t). (5) An update rule U then determines what information from the current interaction is carried forward: 

Ct+1 = U (x, C t, o t, r t, a t). (6) Thus, U determines both what information persists across interactions and how the retained context grows as the task progresses. For reliable long-horizon execution, Ct must remain a useful proxy for Ht. This requires the update rule to satisfy three properties: • Progress tracking. The current observation describes the present page, but not the agent’s broader execution state: which subgoals have been completed, which remain unresolved, or which actions have already been attempted and failed. Ct must preserve this information. • Information identification. Because the retained context cannot include every past observation, 

U must identify which information is important for completing the task and should therefore be carried forward. • Durability. Once important information has been identified, it must remain available across sub-sequent interactions until it is needed at a future step. 

4 AMBER: A PPEND -O NLY MEMORY 

To satisfy the properties above, we propose AMBER (Append-only Memory Bank for Evidence Retention), which jointly learns to reason, act, and generate step-wise memories. AMBER instanti-ates the update rule U in Equation 6 using a persistent memory bank. At each interaction step, the policy generates a free-form memory entry containing information that may be useful later in the trajectory. The entry is appended to the memory bank, which is provided as the retained context Ct

at subsequent steps. We next describe how reasoning, action generation, and memory generation are realized within each interaction step, and how the resulting memory is carried forward across steps. 4.1 TWO -T URN MEMORY GENERATION AND APPEND -O NLY RETENTION 

At each environment step, AMBER interacts with the policy πθ through a two-turn conversation. At the beginning of step t, a new conversation is constructed whose first user message contains the task x, the current observation ot, and the memory bank Ct. The policy first generates reasoning rt

followed by an executable action at:

(rt, a t) ∼ πθ (· | x, o t, C t). (7) The conversation is then continued with a second user message instructing the policy to generate a memory entry. Since the reasoning and action from the first turn remain in the conversation, the same policy generates a free-form memory mt conditioned on the preceding within-step interaction: 

mt ∼ πθ (· | x, o t, C t, r t, a t). (8) Memory generation therefore occurs after the agent has selected its action but before it observes the outcome of that action. The entry mt can record task-relevant information from the current observation together with the agent’s execution state and progress. After the two model turns are complete, the environment executes at and returns the next observation 

ot+1 . The generated memory entry is appended to the persistent memory bank: 

Ct+1 = Ct ∥ [mt], so that Ct = [ m0, . . . , m t−1], (9) with C0 empty. The within-step conversation is then discarded. At step t + 1 , AMBER constructs a new two-turn conversation from x, ot+1 , and the updated memory bank Ct+1 . Thus, previous observations, reasoning traces, actions, and other within-step conversation messages are not replayed across steps; only the generated memory entries are carried forward through Ct.The update in Equation 9 is deterministic and contains no learned parameters. Because each update only appends a new entry, previously written memories cannot be modified or removed. AMBER 4Preprint therefore guarantees durability by construction. The policy is responsible for deciding what infor-mation to record and how to represent the evolving execution state, whereas the append-only update rule determines what persists across interactions. Because every memory entry is retained, the size of Ct grows with the trajectory length. We show empirically that this growth remains substantially smaller than retaining the complete interaction history and stays within practical context limits over the horizons we evaluate. 4.2 END -TO -E ND OPTIMIZATION USING RL The information that should be recorded in memory can vary substantially across tasks and environ-ments. Rather than specifying hand-crafted rules for what the agent should remember, we learn this behavior end-to-end from task outcomes. Specifically, we jointly optimize reasoning, action gener-ation, and memory generation using reinforcement learning, allowing the policy to learn what infor-mation is useful to record and how to use the accumulated memory during subsequent interactions. We train AMBER using outcome rewards with Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024). We observe that directly applying RL to the pretrained instruction model produces unstable rollouts. Following Vattikonda et al. (2025), we therefore first perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on offline trajectories to initialize the policy before RL. The resulting SFT policy is also used as the reference policy during RL. For efficient training, we use asynchronous RL (Mnih et al., 2016). 

Optimizing multi-step rollouts. For each training task, the behavior policy πθold generates a group of G multi-step rollouts. Each rollout g receives a single terminal reward Rg ∈ { 0, 1},giving R = ( R1, . . . , R G). We compute the group-relative advantage as 

Ag = Rg − mean( R)std( R) + δ , (10) where δ is a small constant for numerical stability. Every interaction step in rollout g is assigned the same advantage At,g = Ag , and treated as an independent training sample during policy-gradient op-timization. For the two-turn interaction defined in Section 4.1, a step contains all assistant-generated tokens from the reasoning rt,g , action at,g , and memory mt,g . Template and user-message tokens inserted between the two assistant turns are masked from the loss. Consequently, every assistant-generated token at step t receives the same rollout-level advantage Ag .Let Yt,g denote the set of assistant-generated tokens at step t of rollout g, including reasoning, action, and memory tokens. For token i ∈ Y t,g , we define the importance-sampling ratio 

η(i) 

> t,g

=

πθ



y(i) 

> t,g

| y(<i ) 

> t,g

, x, o t,g , C t,g 



πθold 



y(i) 

> t,g

| y(<i ) 

> t,g

, x, o t,g , C t,g 

 . (11) The resulting GRPO objective is 

J (θ) = Ex∼D (x),τ ∼πθold 

"

1

G

> G

X

> g=1

1

TgTg −1

X

> t=0

1

|Y t,g |

X

> i∈Y t,g

min 



η(i) 

> t,g

Ag , clip  η(i) 

> t,g

, 1 − ϵl, 1 + ϵu

Ag

#

− β KL (πθ ∥ πref ) , (12) where ϵl and ϵu are the lower and upper clipping ranges, respectively, and β controls the KL penalty to the SFT reference policy. Thus, AMBER receives no separate memory-specific reward during RL. The memory writer is op-timized jointly with reasoning and action generation through the terminal outcome reward, allowing useful memory-writing behavior to emerge from task performance rather than from hand-crafted memory rules. 4.3 ROLLOUT INFRASTRUCTURE 

Efficient rollout generation for web-agent RL requires handling several sources of isolation and latency. First, each rollout needs an independent browser session so that browser state, such as cookies, does not leak across rollouts. Second, some WebArena tasks modify persistent website state, requiring separate website containers across concurrent rollouts. Third, browser interaction is often substantially slower than model inference, so synchronizing all rollouts at every step can lead to poor GPU utilization. We therefore separate model inference, browser execution, and website 5Preprint CG            

> C2
> AG
> A2
> Architecture: one task = a group of G rollouts on one leased VM
> Task Queue { T₁, T₂, …, T N}Inference Server (SGLang) Rollout Manager Environment Server (FastAPI) A1
> session: init / reset / step / close
> VM Pool { 1, …, K } Website Host (VM k)
> task n →group of G rollouts prompt(o ₜ, m ₜ₋₁) aₜ, m ₜ
> action a ₜ
> oₜ, r ₜ
> lease VM k release VM k VM k browser I/O solid = per-step traf fi c
> dashed = per-episode (lease / release, incl. container setup + teardown)
> C1
> GRay actors
> Gwebsite containers

Figure 2: Rollout architecture. Each task is expanded into a group of G rollouts on a leased website VM, and each rollout gets its own Ray-managed browser session and website container. Red arrows denote HTTP connections. Solid arrows show per-step traffic between the inference server, rollout manager, and environment server, and dashed arrows show per-episode VM lease and release. serving into independently scalable components. Figure 2 shows the resulting architecture. Each rollout, corresponding to a multi-step episode, is assigned an isolated browser session and website container. 

Remote browser execution and rollout isolation. We use Ray (Moritz et al., 2018) to manage concurrent browser sessions and reward models. The Ray actors are exposed through an environ-ment server implemented in FastAPI. At each environment step t, the rollout manager sends the action at to the environment server over HTTP. The server routes the request to the Ray actor asso-ciated with that rollout, which executes the action in the browser and computes the reward Rt. The resulting observation ot+1 is then returned to the rollout manager through the environment server. Each rollout is assigned a unique identifier, which is used to route requests to the corresponding Ray actor. For tasks that modify website state, the rollout is also assigned a dedicated website con-tainer hosted on a separate virtual machine, preventing changes made by one rollout from affecting another. In practice, each Ray actor creates a BrowserGym (Chezelles et al., 2024) environment to manage the browser interaction and rewards. 

Asynchronous environment interaction. Rollouts execute asynchronously at the interaction-step level. In particular, rollouts do not wait for one another after each environment step. While one roll-out is waiting for browser execution, page loading, or reward computation, another rollout whose en-vironment step has completed can issue a model-inference request for its next action. Since both the inference server, implemented with SGLang, and the environment server are asynchronous HTTP servers, environment interaction and model inference can overlap across different rollouts. This reduces idle inference time caused by slow browser execution and allows the rollouts to progress independently. The complete implementation details are provided in Appendix D. 

5 EXPERIMENTS 

Environment. We use WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024) as the training and evaluation environment. WebArena provides five self-hosted websites: Shopping, Shopping Admin (a content management system), Reddit, GitLab, and Maps, together with 812 curated tasks verified through functional evaluation. We evaluate on WebArena Lite (Liu et al., 2024b), a curated subset of these tasks, and use the remaining tasks during reinforcement learning. Early in our experiments, we found that GitLab produced unstable container setups when many instances were launched in parallel, and therefore exclude it from our experiments. 

Input Representation and Environment Interaction. We use the flattened accessibility tree re-stricted to elements in the current viewport, together with open-tab metadata. We use Browser-Gym (Chezelles et al., 2024) for accessibility-tree extraction and browser interaction. We cap RL rollouts at 20 interaction steps and evaluation at 30 steps. 

Curating synthetic data for Supervised Fine-Tuning. For the SFT stage, we use trajectories released by Go-Browse (Gandhi & Neubig, 2025), which contain accessibility-tree observations coupled with step-wise reasoning and action traces for supervision. We construct step-wise memory labels required by AMBER by retrospectively annotating successful trajectories using Pi coding agent (Zechner, 2025) with GPT 5.5. We provide the full details of the data generation along with the prompts in Appendix G. 6Preprint 

Evaluation. We evaluate AMBER across five independent runs with different seeds using three metrics: (1) Success rate. The success rate for each website, averaged over tasks and the five runs (Section 5.1). (2) Repeated-run reliability. For each task, we count the number of successful runs and report the fraction of tasks solved in at least k of five runs, for k = 1 , . . . , 5 (Section 5.2). (3) Context length. The token length of the action prompt, including the retained context Ct (Sec-tion 5.3). 

Baselines. We compare AMBER against two established context-management strategies: Reason-ing+Action History , which retains past reasoning and actions (e.g., WebAgent-R1 (Wei et al., 2025), Go-Browse (Gandhi & Neubig, 2025)), and Overwrite Memory , which maintains a learned memory through overwrite updates (e.g., MemAgent (Yu et al., 2026), MemSearcher (Yuan et al., 2025)). We use WebAgent-R1 and MemAgent as representative methods from these respective categories, re-implementing both baselines with reference to their official implementations. All methods use the Qwen 3.5 (Team, 2026) model family under a common experimental setup. Experimental details and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix I.2. 5.1 SUCCESS RATE 

Table 1 reports success rates on WebArena Lite, averaged over five independent runs. We make the following observations: • Zero-shot evaluation. Under a zero-shot setting, Qwen 3.5 9B achieves a 34.22% success rate under the full-context protocol, which drops to 21.82% under the AMBER protocol. The same trend is observed for 27B. This shows that Qwen 3.5 is capable of reasoning and acting in web environments, but cannot generate compressed step-wise memory reliably. • Benefit of explicit memory. MemAgent, which maintains an explicit learned memory through overwrite updates, improves over the reasoning-and-action history of WebAgent-R1 by 4.41 per-centage points. This suggests that explicitly training the agent to record task-relevant information is beneficial for long-horizon interaction, rather than relying on reasoning generated primarily to support the next action. • Append-only retention improves success rate. AMBER achieves the highest average success rate, outperforming MemAgent by 4.09 percentage points with Qwen 3.5 9B, and by 2.05 points with 27B. AMBER with Qwen 3.5 27B outperforms Haiku 4.5 by 2.1 points. 5.2 RELIABILITY ACROSS REPEATED RUNS 

Table 2 evaluates how consistently each method solves the same task across the five runs. Each column applies a progressively stricter criterion, from solving a task at least once ( ≥ 1/5) to solving it in all five runs ( 5/5). For the 9B model, AMBER leads at all five reliability thresholds. For the 27B model, AMBER leads at ≥ 2/5, ≥ 3/5, and 5/5, while WebAgent-R1 leads at ≥ 1/5 and MemAgent at ≥ 4/5.

Tasks brought within reach. For the 9B model, both memory-based methods increase the fraction of tasks solved at least once, from 43.3% with reasoning history to 48.8% with overwrite memory and 53.5% with AMBER. Table 1: Success rate (%) on WebArena Lite, averaged over five evaluation runs.                                                                                                       

> Model Shopping Admin Reddit Map Multi-site Average
> Closed Models/Zero-Shot with AMBER
> GPT-5-mini 28.68 38.10 29.41 25.64 27.78 30.71 ±1.11 Haiku 4.5 44.96 62.86 52.94 25.64 38.89 46.72 ±3.24 Qwen 3.5 9B 27.05 28.00 10.72 14.10 16.67 21.82 ±2.97 Qwen 3.5 27B 37.21 43.43 42.35 17.69 40.00 35.75 ±4.19
> Qwen 3.5 9B
> Full Context (Zero-Shot) 36.08 40.20 48.24 14.00 33.33 34.22 ±1.30 WebAgent-R1 29.46 34.29 39.22 10.26 33.33 28.35 ±0.64 MemAgent 28.84 41.71 44.71 17.69 40.00 32.76 ±1.54 AMBER (ours) 29.30 43.43 61.18 23.08 43.33 36.85 ±1.68
> Qwen 3.5 27B
> Full Context (Zero-Shot) 47.91 58.29 55.29 21.54 26.67 45.35 ±1.73 WebAgent-R1 43.26 54.29 76.47 14.62 36.67 44.57 ±3.46 MemAgent 48.84 56.57 71.76 15.38 40.00 46.77 ±3.18 AMBER (ours) 49.77 56.57 70.59 23.85 43.33 48.82 ±1.36

7Preprint Table 2: Repeated-run reliability across five eval-uation runs. Each column reports the percentage of tasks solved in at least the indicated number of runs (e.g., ≥ 3/5 denotes tasks solved in at least three of five runs). 

≥ 1/5 ≥ 2/5 ≥ 3/5 ≥ 4/5 5/5

Qwen 3.5 9B 

WebAgent-R1 43.3% 34.6% 25.2% 24.4% 15.7% MemAgent 48.8% 39.4% 34.6% 25.2% 15.7% AMBER 53.5 % 41.7 % 36.2 % 32.3 % 20.5 %

Qwen 3.5 27B 

WebAgent-R1 62.2 % 49.6% 44.1% 36.2% 30.7% MemAgent 59.1% 52.0% 48.0% 42.5 % 32.3% AMBER 61.4% 55.1 % 50.4 % 41.7% 35.4 %1 5 10 15 20 25 30 

> Step
> 10k 100k
> Context Length
> Append memory (AMBER) Overwrite memory (MemAgent) Reasoning + action history (WebAgent-R1) Full context

Figure 3: Mean action-prompt length by in-teraction step, averaged over five runs. The context length is plotted in log scale. 

Tasks solved repeatedly. At the majority-run threshold ( ≥ 3/5), success increases from 25 .2% 

with reasoning history to 34 .6% with overwrite memory and 36 .2% with AMBER for the 9B model. At the strictest 5/5 threshold, AMBER reaches 20 .5% with 9B and 35 .4% with 27B, outperform-ing both baselines. Thus, AMBER’s main advantage appears in solving tasks consistently across repeated runs rather than simply solving more tasks once. 

5.3 CONTEXT LENGTH 

Since AMBER preserves every memory entry, its context length grows with the trajectory length, whereas overwrite memory remains bounded. Figure 3 quantifies this difference using the fully rendered action prompt. At step 30 , AMBER reaches 7.4k tokens compared with 4k for MemAgent and 9k for WebAgent-R1. However, the context length for AMBER stays well below the full-context baseline, which reaches 90 k tokens by step 30, and within the model’s maximum context length. Although AMBER results in a larger context length, it remains practical. AMBER trades a moderate increase in context length for stronger and more reliable task execution .5.4 SUPERVISION STRENGTH VS . R ETENTION PRIOR 

One possible explanation for the weaker performance of overwrite memory is that RL cannot learn to write a cumulative and lossless memory without stronger supervised data. To test whether better supervised data during the initial SFT phase can reduce the gap, we refine the supervision targets for the generated memory using a pipeline consisting of a judge model that penalizes lossy compression and ensures that the memory is cumulative (see Appendix H for details). As shown in Table 3, refined supervision improves MemAgent’s average success rate from 32 .76% to 35 .59% . The same pattern appears in repeated-run reliability (Table 4): AMBER matches the refined overwrite model at three of the five thresholds, while refined overwrite leads at the remaining two. We use Qwen 3.5 9B for the experiments. These results show that stronger SFT supervision can improve overwrite memory. However, obtain-ing this improvement requires a more complex and expensive data-generation pipeline. AMBER achieves this level of performance without requiring this additional refinement procedure. Table 3: Effect of refined training data on success rate, compared with the original MemAgent and AMBER. 

MemAgent + Refined data AMBER (ours) 

Shopping 28.84 27.44 29.30 Admin 41.71 50.86 43.43 Reddit 44.71 56.47 61.18 Map 17.69 14.62 23.08 Multi-site 40.00 36.67 43.33 Average 32.76 ± 1.54 35.59 ± 1.75 36.85 ± 1.68 

Table 4: Effect of refined training data on repeated-run reliability, compared with the original MemAgent and AMBER. 

MemAgent + Refined data AMBER 

≥ 1/5 48.8% 54.3 % 53.5% 

≥ 2/5 39.4% 39.4% 41.7 %

≥ 3/5 34.6% 34.6% 36.2 %

≥ 4/5 25.2% 28.3% 32.3 %

5/5 15.7% 21.3 % 20.5% 

8Preprint step 4:              

> clear(…)
> step 5:
> click(…)
> sees the error
> write@5: records the error
> steps 6, 7:
> click(…) ,fill(…)
> error stays in memory; clear() not generated again
> ✗clear(): rejected other action
> Afi nal answer the error is in the memory context
> Append ✗AOverwrite ✗✗✗A
> step 4:
> clear(…)
> step 5:
> click(…)
> sees the error
> write@5: records the error
> step 6:
> click(…) write@6: error erased
> step 12:
> clear(…)
> step 13:
> fill(…)
> sees the error
> write@13: error not recorded
> step 14:
> click(…)
> step 15:
> clear(…)
> ✗✗✗✗
> Goal: “I will arrive Pittsburgh Airport soon. Provide the name of a Hilton hotel in the vicinity, if available. Then, tell me the the shortest walking distance to a supermarket from the hotel.”

Figure 4: Error recovery on a Maps task. The environment supports fill but not clear . Both agents issue clear , see the error, and record it in memory. MemAgent’s next overwrite erases the record, and it issues clear repeatedly. AMBER’s appended entry persists, and it never repeats the action. See Figure 7 for the detailed trajectory. Goal: “List reviewers who mention good  fi ngerprint resistance.” 

Rachel and T. Gannon never appear in the same viewport.           

> Append
> step 1:
> scroll(…)
> sees Rachel
> write@1: + Rachel
> step 2:
> scroll(…)
> keeps scanning
> step 3:
> scroll(…)
> sees T. Gannon
> write@3: + T. Gannon
> step 4:
> scroll(…)
> A✓Rachel, T. Gannon
> Overwrite
> step 1:
> scroll(…)
> sees Rachel
> write@1: + Rachel
> step 2:
> scroll(…)
> sees T. Gannon
> write@2: T. Gannon only; Rachel dropped
> A✗T. Gannon only
> Step 1 (both agents): Rachel : “It is super clear and
> fi ngerprint resistant .”
> Later (both agents): T. Gannon : “…it does seem to
> resist fi ngerprints and stay cleaner.” Rachel in context T. Gannon in context both in context other memory entry
> Afi nal answer

Figure 5: Recursive-compression loss. The task asks for reviewers who mention good fingerprint resistance, and the two matching reviews never share a viewport. Both agents record Rachel after the first scroll. The overwrite agent’s rewrite after it sees T. Gannon drops Rachel, and it answers with T. Gannon only. AMBER’s original entry persists alongside the new one, and it answers correctly with both reviewers. 

6 TRAJECTORY ANALYSIS 

Table 5: Percentage of trajectories retaining environment feedback in memory after k steps. 

k 1 2 3 4 5

% trajectories 100.0 25.6 7.5 4.5 0.8 

In this section, we analyze the trajectories of agents with over-write vs. append memories for a more nuanced understanding of the failures. We observe two main patterns which highlight the failure modes of overwrite memory and how append mem-ory mitigates them: 

Recovery after execution errors. Overwrite memory can erase error feedback from the environment, potentially causing the agent to repeat previously re-jected actions. We focus on invalid actions, for which the environment provides clear, actionable feedback that can guide recovery. Table 5 shows that this feedback is lost from memory after four steps, and Figure 4 illustrates the repetition of previously rejected actions. To quantify this behavior, we define an event as the first rejection of an invalid action within an episode and count how often the agent repeats that action afterward. Averaged over five seeds, AMBER re-issues an invalid ac-tion 1.29 times per event, compared with 1.95 for MemAgent. Both methods heed most corrections, but MemAgent re-issues the invalid action six or more times in 15.4% of events, compared with 3.3% for AMBER. While this analysis focuses on invalid actions, it shows that append memory can retain and act on feedback better than overwrite memory .

Information loss. Overwrite memory can also drop evidence that was already recorded correctly, making it unavailable when needed later. We call this failure mode recursive-compression loss 

(Figure 5; more examples in Appendix F). 

7 CONCLUSION 

In this paper, we study context retention in long-horizon web agents and propose AMBER (Append-only Memory Bank for Evidence Retention). AMBER separates the learned decision of what to record from the deterministic decision of what to retain: the policy writes a free-form memory entry at each step, and an append-only rule preserves every entry. We show that AMBER can be trained 9Preprint end-to-end with reinforcement learning from outcome rewards after minimal supervised fine-tuning. On WebArena Lite, AMBER improves average success over overwrite memory across 9B and 27B model sizes, and achieves stronger repeated-run reliability. Our trajectory analysis shows that over-write memory can lose recorded evidence and error feedback. While refined supervision narrows the gap for overwrite memory, it requires an expensive data curation pipeline, and AMBER matches it without this additional curation. Thus, AMBER is a simple, scalable method for training long-horizon web agents that balances task performance, reliability, context efficiency and supervision complexity. 

8 AI D ISCLOSURE 

In this work, we use generative AI tools for the following: • Writing code, which is verified by the lead author. • Drafting parts of the manuscript, which is proofread and rephrased by the authors. • Synthetic data generation (details are provided in the relevant sections) • Data analysis and trajectory analysis. We take responsibility for the final content of this work, including text, claims or artifacts produced with the aid of generative AI. 

REFERENCES 

De Chezelles, Thibault Le Sellier, Sahar Omidi Shayegan, Lawrence Keunho Jang, Xing Han L` u, Ori Yoran, Dehan Kong, Frank F Xu, Siva Reddy, Quentin Cappart, et al. The browsergym ecosystem for web agent research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05467 , 2024. Yang Deng, Xuan Zhang, Wenxuan Zhang, Yifei Yuan, See-Kiong Ng, and Tat-Seng Chua. On the multi-turn instruction following for conversational web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15057 ,2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.15057 .Apurva Gandhi and Graham Neubig. Go-browse: Training web agents with structured exploration. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03533 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.03533 .Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei Han. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516 , 2025. Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the association for computational linguistics , 12:157–173, 2024a. Xiao Liu, Tianjie Zhang, Yu Gu, Iat Long Iong, Yifan Xu, Xixuan Song, Shudan Zhang, Hanyu Lai, Xinyi Liu, Hanlin Zhao, et al. Visualagentbench: Towards large multimodal models as visual foundation agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06327 , 2024b. Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 1928–1937. PmLR, 2016. Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, Melih Elibol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul, Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. Ray: A distributed framework for emerging AI applications. In Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau and Geoff Voelker (eds.), 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2018, Carlsbad, CA, USA, October 8-10, 2018 , pp. 561–577. USENIX Association, 2018. URL 

https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi18/presentation/nishihara .Shikhar Murty, Hao Zhu, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Christopher D. Manning. NNetNav: Unsuper-vised learning of browser agents through environment interaction in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02907 , 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02907 .Magnus M¨ uller and Gregor ˇ Zuniˇ c. Browser use: Enable ai to control your browser, 2024. URL 

https://github.com/browser-use/browser-use .10 Preprint OpenAI. Introducing deep research. https://openai.com/index/ introducing-deep-research/ , 2025. [Accessed 13-09-2026]. Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 ,2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08560 .Zehan Qi, Xiao Liu, Iat Long Iong, Hanyu Lai, Xueqiao Sun, Wenyi Zhao, Yu Yang, Xinyue Yang, Jiadai Sun, Shuntian Yao, Tianjie Zhang, Wei Xu, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. WebRL: Training LLM web agents via self-evolving online curriculum reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411. 02337 .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathemati-cal reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366 .Qwen Team. Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents, February 2026. URL https://qwen. ai/blog?id=qwen3.5 .Dheeraj Vattikonda, Santhoshi Ravichandran, Emiliano Penaloza, Hadi Nekoei, Megh Thakkar, Thibault Le Sellier de Chezelles, Nicolas Gontier, Miguel Mu˜ noz M´ armol, Sahar Omidi Shayegan, Stefania Raimondo, Xue Liu, Alexandre Drouin, Laurent Charlin, Alexandre Pich´ e, Alexandre Lacoste, and Massimo Caccia. How to train your LLM web agent: A statis-tical diagnosis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04103 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2507.04103 .Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 , 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291 .Zhepei Wei, Wenlin Yao, Yao Liu, Weizhi Zhang, Qin Lu, Liang Qiu, Changlong Yu, Puyang Xu, Chao Zhang, Bing Yin, et al. Webagent-r1: Training web agents via end-to-end multi-turn re-inforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 7920–7939, 2025. Xixi Wu, Kuan Li, Yida Zhao, Liwen Zhang, Litu Ou, Huifeng Yin, Zhongwang Zhang, Xin-miao Yu, Dingchu Zhang, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Minhao Cheng, Shuai Wang, Hong Cheng, and Jingren Zhou. ReSum: Unlocking long-horizon search intelligence via context summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.13313 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2509.13313 .Yiheng Xu, Dunjie Lu, Zhennan Shen, Junli Wang, Zekun Wang, Yuchen Mao, Caiming Xiong, and Tao Yu. AgentTrek: Agent trajectory synthesis via guiding replay with web tutorials. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2412.09605 .Sikuan Yan, Xiufeng Yang, Zuchao Huang, Ercong Nie, Zifeng Ding, Zonggen Li, Xiaowen Ma, Jinhe Bi, Kristian Kersting, Jeff Z. Pan, Hinrich Sch¨ utze, Volker Tresp, and Yunpu Ma. Memory-R1: Enhancing large language model agents to manage and utilize memories via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19828 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508. 19828 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629 .11 Preprint Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik R Narasimhan. τ -bench: A benchmark for Tool-Agent-User interaction in real-world domains. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= roNSXZpUDN .Rui Ye, Zhongwang Zhang, Kuan Li, Huifeng Yin, Zhengwei Tao, Yida Zhao, Liangcai Su, Liwen Zhang, Zile Qiao, Xinyu Wang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Siheng Chen, Jingren Zhou, and Yong Jiang. AgentFold: Long-horizon web agents with proactive context management. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24699 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.24699 .Hongli Yu, Tinghong Chen, Jiangtao Feng, Jiangjie Chen, Weinan Dai, Qiying Yu, Ya-Qin Zhang, Wei-Ying Ma, Jingjing Liu, Mingxuan Wang, and Hao Zhou. MemAgent: Reshaping long-context LLM with multi-conv RL-based memory agent. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02259 .Qianhao Yuan, Jie Lou, Zichao Li, Jiawei Chen, Yaojie Lu, Hongyu Lin, Le Sun, Debing Zhang, and Xianpei Han. Memsearcher: Training llms to reason, search and manage memory via end-to-end reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02805 , 2025. Mario Zechner. Pi Coding Agent — pi.dev. https://pi.dev/ , 2025. [Accessed 09-08-2026]. Yuxiang Zhang, Jiangming Shu, Ye Ma, Xueyuan Lin, Shangxi Wu, and Jitao Sang. Mem-ory as action: Autonomous context curation for long-horizon agentic tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12635 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.12635 .Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel: LLM agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence , 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10144 .Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. Webarena: A realis-tic web environment for building autonomous agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.13854 .Zijian Zhou, Ao Qu, Zhaoxuan Wu, Sunghwan Kim, Alok Prakash, Daniela Rus, Jinhua Zhao, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Paul Pu Liang. MEM1: Learning to synergize memory and reasoning for efficient long-horizon agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15841 , 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.15841 .

A LIMITATIONS 

AMBER retains every generated memory entry, so its context grows linearly with the number of interaction steps. Over the horizons we evaluate, this growth remains well within the model’s context window and is comparable to retaining the reasoning history. At substantially longer horizons, however, some form of selection or consolidation may become necessary. How to introduce such operations while preserving information that may become relevant much later in a trajectory remains an open question. In both append and overwrite memory, we observe that models sometimes hallucinate when gener-ating the memory. This could potentially be an effect of the model being trained with reinforcement learning solely using outcome rewards. We leave addressing this to future work. Finally, our information loss analysis is qualitative. The examples in Section 6 demonstrate that information can be recorded correctly and subsequently lost through memory rewriting, but they are examples rather than an estimate of how frequently this failure mode occurs. A systematic characterization of memory failures across tasks and trajectories would provide a more complete picture of when different retention strategies succeed or fail. 

B BROADER IMPACT 

AMBER improves evidential durability and auditability, but append-only retention should not im-ply indefinite storage in deployed systems. Persistent entries may contain sensitive, stale, incorrect, 12 Preprint or adversarial information. Practical systems should separate the immutable trajectory representa-tion studied here from policies governing storage duration, prompt-time selection, user inspection and deletion, and redaction of private information. Web agents also require safeguards against per-sistent prompt injection and consequential unauthorized actions. Our experiments use self-hosted benchmark environments and involve no real users. 

C EXTENDED RELATED WORK AND DESIGN SPACE 

This appendix expands Section 2. 

Trajectory supervision and outcome-based adaptation. Trajectory-based methods obtain demonstrations without relying entirely on manual annotation. NNetNav explores websites and retroactively labels action sequences (Murty et al., 2024), AgentTrek converts tutorials into task specifications and replays them in real environments (Xu et al., 2025), and Go-Browse frames ex-ploration as graph search to collect successful long-horizon trajectories for SFT (Gandhi & Neubig, 2025). Outcome-based methods instead optimize the policy during interaction. WebRL introduces a self-evolving curriculum and an outcome reward model (Qi et al., 2025), and WebAgent-R1 per-forms multi-turn RL with binary task rewards after a behavior-cloning warm start (Wei et al., 2025). More broadly, Vattikonda et al. (2025) study SFT and on-policy RL across web-agent post-training settings and find their combination important for strong performance. 

The design space. These works make coupled choices along five axes: the observation represen-tation of the current environment, the context retained across interactions, the model family, the training strategy, and the environment in which the system is evaluated. The evaluation environment deserves particular attention, because it determines how much pressure a retention rule is actually under. Table 6 organizes representative systems along these axes as a conceptual map, not a perfor-mance comparison; the systems differ in model, action space, and training budget. Our experiments vary only the second axis. We hold the observation representation, model family, training strategy, and evaluation environment fixed, and compare retained-context designs in one shared setting. Table 6: Representative combinations of evaluation environment, observation input, retained con-text, and training. Recurrent overwrite memory has so far been validated on single-template or non-interactive settings, and not on diverse web navigation. The table organizes design choices; it does not imply that results are directly comparable across different tasks and environments.                               

> System Evaluation environment Observation input Retained info. Retention Training Go-Browse WebArena Accessibility tree Reasoning history Accumulate SFT WebAgent-R1 WebArena Simplified HTML Reasoning history Accumulate SFT + RL MEM1 WebShop, multi-hop QA Custom text Explicit memory Recurrent overwrite RL MemAgent Long-document QA Text segments Explicit memory Recurrent overwrite RL AMBER (ours) WebArena Accessibility tree Explicit memory Append-only SFT + RL

Experiential memory. Trajectory memory, the subject of this paper, differs from experiential memory , which transfers knowledge across tasks or sessions. Reflexion stores verbal feedback from failed attempts (Shinn et al., 2023); ExpeL extracts reusable natural-language insights (Zhao et al., 2024); Voyager accumulates executable skills (Wang et al., 2023); and MemGPT manages multiple memory tiers beyond the model context (Packer et al., 2023). These systems address which past experience should be retained or retrieved for future problems. We instead study whether evidence generated during one ongoing task remains available until that task terminates. 

D ROLLOUT INFRASTRUCTURE DETAILS 

Our rollout infrastructure separates policy inference, browser execution, and website serving so that each component can be provisioned independently. 

Remote browser execution. Browser sessions run on dedicated environment servers and are ac-cessed through an HTTP interface for session creation, reset, interaction, and termination. This transport layer is hidden behind a thin Gym-style client, so the rollout manager in the trainer in-teracts with each remote browser through the same environment interface as a local environment and never issues HTTP requests directly. Before being returned to the policy, each observation is reduced to the flattened accessibility tree, open-tab titles and URLs, and the most recent action error. 13 Preprint inference server stays saturated                          

> rollout 1 rollout 2 rollout 3 rollout 4
> GEGEGEEGEGEGGEGEGEGEGEGEG
> Every inference request G (action turn + memory turn) is handled by the inference server asynchronously Every environment step E goes to the env server →its own Ray actor
> →its own WebArena VM asynchronously
> Time →

Figure 6: Asynchronous Rollouts: Each rollout is a multi-step episode with each step accessing the environment and inference asynchronously. This abstraction separates rollout logic from browser placement, allowing the same rollout code to operate against any reachable environment server. 

Step-level asynchronous execution. Each rollout progresses independently through alternating policy-inference and environment-interaction steps. Both operations are issued asynchronously, so rollouts need not synchronize after each interaction. For example, while one rollout waits for a browser action, page load, or task validation to complete, another rollout whose previous environ-ment step has finished can perform model inference for its next action. This interleaving allows environment latency and policy inference to overlap across concurrent rollouts. 

Browser isolation. Each rollout is assigned an independent BrowserGym (Chezelles et al., 2024) session hosted by a Ray (Moritz et al., 2018) actor. Concurrent rollouts therefore do not share browser state, cookies, or navigation history. The environment server tracks active sessions, limits the number of concurrent browsers, and reclaims sessions after termination or prolonged inactivity. Browser failures are contained within the corresponding rollout rather than affecting other active sessions. 

Website hosting and state isolation. Website services run on hosts separate from browser ex-ecution and policy inference. This separation allows website capacity to scale independently and is particularly important for tasks that modify persistent website state. Such rollouts are assigned isolated copies of the required mutable services so that writes made by one rollout cannot affect another. For WebArena, we share services whose state does not need to be isolated and replicate only the mutable services required by a task. Each website host maintains a set of rollout slots, where a slot contains dedicated containers for the mutable services assigned to that rollout. A slot is returned to the available pool only after these containers have been torn down, preventing state from leaking between successive rollouts. Because no WebArena task modifies more than two mutable services, our configuration supports eight concurrent isolated rollout slots per website host. 14 Preprint 

E RECOVERING FROM EXECUTION ERRORS ✗ clear(): rejected other action A fi nal answer the error is in the memory context 0 5 10 15 20 step 

AMBER (append) ✗ AMemAgent (overwrite) 

✗ ✗ ✗ A

(a) (b) (b) 

(a) AMBER (append), steps 4 to 7 

the error is recorded once and stays in memory 

step 4: clear('145') ✗

step 5: sees NameError, click('147') 

memory after step 5 write@0 … write@4 

write@5: “A previous clear action produced a NameError, but the page state is now showing the search  fi eld  fi lled with Hilton Garden Inn Pittsburgh Airport South-Robinson Mall …” 

step 6: click('149') 

memory after step 6 write@0 … write@4 

write@5: “A previous clear action produced a NameError, but the page state is now showing the search  fi eld  fi lled with Hilton Garden Inn Pittsburgh Airport South-Robinson Mall …” 

write@6 … 

step 7: fill('158', 'Hilton Garden Inn Pittsburgh Airport South-Robinson Mall') 

write@5 stays in memory through step 13; clear() is never generated again 

(b) MemAgent (overwrite), steps 4 to 6 and 12 to 15 

the error is erased, and clear() is generated again 

step 4: clear('145') ✗

step 5: sees NameError, click('147') 

memory after step 5 

write@5: “Progress: A previous clear attempt failed with 

NameError: Invalid action type 'clear' , but the page still shows the search box containing Hilton Pittsburgh Airport .…” 

step 6: click('466') 

memory after step 6 

write@6: “Progress: OpenStreetMap search results for Hilton Pittsburgh Airport are visible. …” 

error erased; no write from step 6 to 11 mentions clear() steps 7 to 11 

step 12: clear('145') ✗

step 13: sees NameError, fill('145', 'supermarket near Hilton Garden Inn Pittsburgh Airport') 

reasoning: “… which means I can't use the clear action.” memory after step 13 

write@13: “Progress / current page state: The current OpenStreetMap page title is Hilton Garden Inn Pittsburgh Airport | OpenStreetMap , … No results found …” 

error not recorded 

step 14: click('149') 

step 15: clear('158') ✗

a different  fi eld; NameError again at step 16 

Figure 7: Task 33. Both agents issue an invalid clear() at step 4 and record the error at step 5. (a) AMBER keeps that entry in memory through step 13, never issues clear() again, and answers at step 13. (b) MemAgent erases the error at step 6 and issues clear() again at step 12; its reasoning at step 13 notes that clear() is not allowed, but its memory does not record it, and it tries clear() on another field at step 15. 15 Preprint ✗ clear(): rejected other action A fi nal answer the error is in the memory context 0 5 10 15 20 step 

AMBER (append) ✗ AMemAgent (overwrite) 

✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ AAMBER (append) , steps 5 to 9 MemAgent (overwrite) , steps 5 to 9 

step 5: clear('163') ✗

step 6: sees NameError, fill('163', 'Carnegie Mellon University Library') 

step 5: clear('163') ✗

step 6: sees NameError, fill('163', '') 

memory after step 6 write@0 … write@5 

write@6: “A previous clear attempt failed with an invalid action type error, …” 

memory after step 6 

write@6: “A prior clear attempt failed with 'Invalid action type clear', but the To textbox has now been emptied. …” 

step 7: click('166') 

step 7: clear('163') ✗

the lesson is still in context memory after step 7 write@0 … write@5 

write@6: “A previous clear attempt failed with an invalid action type error, …” 

write@7 … memory after step 7 

write@7: “The To  fi eld has been cleared successfully. …” 

the NameError is dropped; only “cleared” is kept 

step 8: select_option('166', …) 

step 8: sees NameError, fill('163', 'CMU Library') 

memory after step 8 write@0 … write@5 

write@6: “A previous clear attempt failed with an invalid action type error, …” 

write@7 … write@8 … memory after step 8 

write@8: “The To  fi eld is empty and the Foot (OSRM) travel result from the old Michigan route is still displayed …” 

no lesson left 

step 9: send_msg_to_user(…) 

no clear() after step 5 

step 9: clear('163') ✗

NameError again; 8 clear() calls in total 

Figure 8: Task 56. Both agents issue an invalid clear() at step 5 and record the error at step 6. AMBER keeps that entry in context, never retries clear() , and answers at step 9. MemAgent retries clear() at step 7 anyway, then overwrites the entry with one that says only that the field was cleared, dropping the error; it issues clear() eight times in total before answering at step 24. 16 Preprint ✗ clear(): rejected other action A fi nal answer the error is in the memory context 0 5 10 15 20 step 

AMBER (append) ✗ AMemAgent (overwrite) 

✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ A

(a) (b) 

(a) AMBER (append), steps 7 to 9 

the rejection is written down 

(b) MemAgent (overwrite), steps 6 to 8 

the rejection is never written down 

step 7: clear('163') ✗ step 6: clear('163') ✗

memory after step 7 write@0 … write@7 memory after step 6 

write@6: “… The To  fi eld was cleared after the Boston route was attempted. …” 

the rejected clear() is recorded as done 

step 8: sees NameError, fill('163', '') 

step 7: sees NameError, click('174') 

reasoning: “I tried to clear the 'To'  fi eld twice …” memory after step 8 write@0 … write@7 

write@8: “The page still shows the previous Boston-area directions after an invalid clear attempt. …” 

memory after step 7 

write@7: “… The Reverse Directions button was clicked to return to the original MIT → Harvard state. …” 

the error from the reasoning is left out 

step 9: fill('163', 'Massachusetts Institute of Technology') 

clear() is never issued again 

step 8: clear('163') ✗

7 clear() calls in total; the lesson is never written 

Figure 9: Task 75. (a) AMBER writes the rejected clear() into memory at step 8 and switches to fill() , never issuing clear() again. (b) MemAgent records the rejected clear() as done and, although its reasoning notes the failure, never writes it down; it calls clear() seven times in total. 17 Preprint 

F ADDITIONAL QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS 

We provide more examples of trajectories exhibiting the recursive-compression loss described in Section 6. In each case, the overwrite agent initially records task-relevant evidence correctly but subsequently removes it during a memory rewrite. These examples are qualitative and are not in-tended to estimate the frequency of this failure mode. • Task 23 (set accumulation across a long page). The AMBER trajectory records Rachel at one scroll position and T. Gannon at a later position, retaining both for the final answer. In the over-write trajectory, Rachel is initially recorded correctly but disappears when the memory is rewritten after a later scroll, resulting in an incomplete answer containing only T. Gannon. • Task 202 (direct deletion of required evidence). The overwrite memory correctly records order #000000136 and its May 23 timestamp. After subsequent interactions, the replacement memory drops this order while retaining an older April order, which the agent later reports. The AMBER trajectory preserves the original May 23 record and answers correctly. Extending the task 23 example in Figure 5, we visualize task 202 in Figure 10. The displayed text is abridged from the audited evaluation trajectories, and the observation claims use the prompt-time viewport-filtered accessibility trees rather than the stored raw trees. Goal: “Get the date of the most recent canceled order.”             

> AMBER
> step 2:
> click(…)
> sees #136
> write@2: #136, May 23
> step 3:
> select_option(…)
> status = Canceled
> step 4:
> click(…)
> apply fi lter
> A✓May 23, 2023 (#136)
> Overwrite
> step 2:
> click(…)
> sees #136
> write@2: #136, May 23
> step 3:
> select_option(…)
> times out
> step 4:
> fill(…)
> clears a date
> write@4: #136 erased; keeps #308
> ⋯A✗Apr 19, 2023 (#308) steps 5–13: sort, fi lter retries
> Step 2 (both agents): Orders grid shows #000000136 (Lily Potter), May 23, 2023, 9:20 PM , status Canceled.
> #136 / May 23 in context #308 / Apr 19 in context other memory entry
> Afi nal answer

Figure 10: Recursive-compression loss on task 202. Both agents record that order #000000136 (May 23) is the most recent canceled order. The overwrite agent’s later rewrite keeps only older canceled orders, and it answers with an April order. AMBER’s original entry persists, and it answers correctly. Text is abridged for legibility. 18 Preprint Goal: “Like all submissions created by CameronKelsey in subreddit earthporn” 

Posts: ① Henry’s Fork · ② Yosemite · ③ Little White Salmon River. Rail: ■ a note that names ③, □ a note that does not. 

memory ENVIRONMENT 

(page the agent sees) action AGENT 

▸ reasoning → action ✎ memory 

NOTES 

steps 0–2 · Home →

Forums → Alphabetical 

→ open Forums → Alphabetical →

EarthPorn 

click(…) ×3 

3 · /f/EarthPorn hot feed: “2 years later … Yosemite” by CameronKelsey 

▸ “So I need to click on the 'CameronKelsey' link to see all submissions by this user.” 

→ open CameronKelsey’s author page 

click('156') 

4 · /user/CameronKelsey 

① Henry’s Fork 

② Yosemite 

③ Little White Salmon 

→ Upvote ①

✎ m4 : “The  fi rst visible submission is … Henry's Fork … The second … Yosemite … The third visible submission is 'I can't wait for all this green to start coming back! | Little White Salmon River …'” 

click('142') 

All three posts are on screen together at steps 4–5, and not again until step 17. 

m4 

5 · /user/CameronKelsey 

① shows Retract upvote (liked) 

→ go to the EarthPorn forum 

✎ m5 : still lists ③ Little White Salmon 

click('171') 

m5 

6 · /f/EarthPorn 

① liked · ② Upvote 

→ Upvote ②

✎ m6 : “… The Yosemite Upvote control has been selected; next verify it is liked and handle the remaining CameronKelsey submissions.” 

click('207') 

m6 is the  fi rst note that drops ③’s name. An overwrite agent would carry only m6 into step 7. 

m6 

7 · /f/EarthPorn 

① ② show Retract upvote (liked) 

③ not on this page 

▸ “… From my previous actions, I can see that there was a third submission by CameronKelsey: 3. 'I can't wait for all this green to start coming back! | Little White Salmon River, WA, USA …' I need to  fi nd this submission on the current page and like it. However, I don't see it in the current viewport of the page.” 

→ scroll down to look for ③

scroll(0, 500) ★ Recall. ③ is not on this page, not in the latest note m6, and not in the action list (the prompt lists past actions only). The title can only come from m4/m5. 

m4 m5 m6 

in context at step 7 

8–12 · /f/EarthPorn, then the “More” page 

③ not on either page 

▸ “I've scrolled down the page twice now, but I haven't found any more submissions by CameronKelsey.” 

→ scroll the feed; open the next page 

✎ m8–m16 : Yosemite post “with the Upvote control still visible” 

scroll(…) ×4 click('1099') 

Recall fades: ③ is not named again until step 17. 

⚠ The Yosemite note is wrong: the step-7 page shows “Retract upvote” on 

②.

13–16 · search box 

✗ Invalid action type 'press' 

✗ keyboard_press() takes 1 positional argument 

▸ “Submit the search for 'CameronKelsey' to 

fi nd all submissions by this user” 

→ search for “CameronKelsey” (2 attempts rejected) 

fill('57', …) press(…) ✗

keyboard_press(…) ✗

keyboard_press('Enter') 

Switches to search; two rejected actions on the way. 

17 · /search? q=CameronKelsey 

③ ② ① in the results 

▸ “The page shows 3 results, all of which appear to be posts in the earthporn subreddit created by CameronKelsey.” 

→ open the  fi rst result ( ③)

click('139') ③ is back on screen. 

18 · /f/EarthPorn/98256 (post ③)

→ Upvote ③click('152') 

19–21 · ③ shows Retract upvote (liked) 

→ report that all three posts are liked 

▸ “I have liked all submissions created by CameronKelsey … Henry's Fork … Yosemite … Little White Salmon River” 

click('142') ×2 send_msg_to_user(…) 

✓ reward 1 : all three posts upvoted. 

Figure 11: Recall from older memory on task 720 (AMBER). At step 4 the author page shows all three of CameronKelsey’s posts, and m4 records them, including the third (Little White Salmon River). By step 7 the agent has moved to the EarthPorn listing, where that post is not on the page, and the latest entry, m6, no longer names it, yet the step-7 reasoning quotes its title, which can only come from m4 or m5; an overwrite agent would have only m6 in context. The post is not named again until a search surfaces it at step 17, after which the agent upvotes it and succeeds. 19 Preprint 

G SYNTHETIC SFT D ATA GENERATION 

We generate the synthetic memory supervision data for the SFT phase using the Pi coding agent (Zechner, 2025) with GPT 5.5 as the annotator. The annotator is given a complete trajec-tory and final answer from the Go-Browse dataset containing the accessibility trees, reasoning and action traces as context for determining which information from an earlier step will remain useful, and is asked to generate the synthetic memory traces in a retrospective manner. The prompt forbids leaking future-only information into an earlier step’s memory. Go-Browse trajectories use full ac-cessibility trees, whereas our RL training and evaluation use viewport-filtered trees. We find that this observation mismatch does not prevent effective RL fine-tuning. The figure below shows the prompt used for generating the memory traces for all the steps in a single trajectory. {trajectory file } is the path of the source trajectory, {save file } is the path of the label file to be written, and {few shot prompt } is the few-shot block given afterwards. The output is a JSONL file with one (step, memory) record per trajectory step. 

Analyze the trajectory in {trajectory_file}, which contains a step by step execution of a task. The trajectory file is JSON with the following relevant shape: 

> ,→
> ,→

{"goal": <task given to the agent>, "steps": [{"step_num": <step number in the trajectory>, "observation": {"axtree": <full accessibility tree of the webpage at the step>, ,→

"last_action_error": <any error encountered in the previous action> ,→

}, "response": {"model_full_response": <full response given by the model>, ,→

"reasoning": <reasoning trace extracted from the model response>, ,→

"action": <action extracted from the model response which is performed on the webpage> ,→

}, "memory": null }]}The execution trace can contain multiple steps, and all steps share this schema. The final answer provided by the agent is recorded in the action of the agent in the last step. 

> ,→
> ,→

Your task is to create {save_file}. Do not edit {trajectory_file} or any other file. ,→

For every step in the trajectory, create the memory that should be available immediately after that step. The memory should be acompact running summary of the execution so far: what task is being pursued, what has been accomplished, what useful page facts have been discovered, and what the next useful subgoal appears to be from the current page state. A future agent should be able to continue after Step N without rereading any previous accessibility tree, using only the saved memory for Step N and later observations. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

20 Preprint 

You may inspect the entire trajectory, including future steps and the final answer, when deciding what memory would have been useful after any earlier step. Use those future steps as oracle context for relevance: they can tell you which page facts, filters, choices, errors, or intermediate results mattered later. However, do not leak future-only information into an earlier step's memory. The memory for Step N may include only information available from the goal, observations up to and including Step N, and high-level progress/subgoals justified by that current state. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Preserve facts that would help a future agent solve the task, even if the recorded agent did not explicitly use them. Include useful labels, values, table rows, option names, link destinations when semantically important, identifiers visible as page content, item ordering, status text, selected filters, visible errors, or other page facts needed to choose later actions or answer the task. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

The memory at each step is cumulative, not a delta. If a fact or plan remains important after Step N, include it in Step N's memory even if it first appeared in an earlier step. Update the running summary as the trajectory progresses. Do not repeat the original goal verbatim in every memory entry. Mention the task goal only when it is needed to clarify current progress or the next subgoal; otherwise focus on what has changed, what remains relevant, and what should be done next. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Memory may include high-level progress and next-step intent, such as "the AskReddit forum is open and the sort menu should be used to choose Most commented." Do not copy the agent's reasoning trace, do not include raw action syntax, and do not mention low-level navigation mechanics unless they are necessary to describe the current state or next subgoal. Do not include form values typed by the agent unless they are visible page content or necessary task state. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Each memory value must be either: 

- a plain string containing the useful running memory after that step, or ,→

- null only when no useful page facts, progress, task state, error state, or next subgoal need to be retained. ,→

{few_shot_prompt} Use Python's json library to read {trajectory_file} and all the example trajectories. Write {save_file} in JSONL format with exactly one object per trajectory step, in ascending step order. Each line must contain exactly the fields `step ` and `memory `:

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

``` {save_file} {"step": 0, "memory": <memory for step 0>} {"step": 1, "memory": <memory for step 1>} {"step": 2, "memory": <memory for step 2>} ... {"step": N, "memory": <memory for step N>} 

``` 

The `step ` value must be the step's `step_num ` from the trajectory. The `memory ` value must be a JSON string or null. The output file must contain one line for every step in the trajectory, including steps whose memory is null. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Create parent directories for {save_file} if needed. Do not edit any file other than {save_file}. Begin your analysis now. ,→

21 Preprint We fill the {few shot prompt } placeholder with the template below. Its {examples } field lists the paths of a small number of reference trajectories whose memory fields are already populated.                                                       

> #Examples of memory
> The following trajectory files contain examples of step-wise memory: {examples} The format is the same as the trajectory you are analyzing, with the memory field filled. Refer to these examples and follow similar patterns when creating the memory for each of the steps for the trajectory you are analyzing. When in doubt, treat these as the gold standard.
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

H REFINED OVERWRITE SUPERVISION 

Overwrite memory may underperform simply because the targets above ask one generation to re-construct everything that still matters, at every step. To test whether better supervision removes the limitation, we curate a second set of overwrite targets by refining the SFT data created in Appendix G using a substantially more expensive pipeline, and train an additional policy on them. For each step of a successful Go-Browse trajectory, we partition the synthetic memory into two parts: a current state (which simply retains the synthetic memory verbatim) carrying the current execution state and information observed in the current step, and a cumulative memory that retains all the factual in-formation deemed important by analyzing the future turns. We also generate synthetic reasoning traces that reason about what to keep in the cumulative memory. At the end of the refinement stage, the generated synthetic memory contains three blocks: <think> containing the reasoning for what to retain in the long-term memory, <memory> containing the long-term memory, and <state> 

containing the synthetic memory from the first phase of SFT generation. To curate this data, we use a generate–judge–revise loop, where a generator generates the reasoning and memory blocks for each step conditioned on the previous memory blocks, the current observa-tion, reasoning and action, and the state for the current step. A judge, with access to the same data, evaluates the generated memory at each step. The judge returns a verdict, a list of violations, and free-form feedback. It evaluates the following criteria in a fixed order, so that later criteria cannot override earlier ones: 1. Factual faithfulness. Every claim is supported, and an issued action is not described as success-ful or failed before its outcome is observed. 2. Coverage. All still-useful facts and progress from the previous memory, the previous state, and the current step remain represented. An omission is a violation whenever it could make a later step lose a needed fact, repeat work, decide worse, or fail to answer. 3. Updating. Evidence that refines or contradicts an earlier claim replaces it; memory must not carry an obsolete claim beside its correction. 4. Partition. Immediate next actions, instructions, and near-term plans stay in current state. 5. Hygiene and concision. Ephemeral identifiers, transient UI description, stale content, and du-plicates are absent. Concision is assessed only after faithfulness, coverage, and updating, and the judge is instructed never to prefer a shorter but lossy candidate. 6. Reasoning quality. The rationale reads as a continuation of the agent’s own action reasoning rather than as a curator’s report. Failures are reported using the thirteen violation names in Table 7. We append the violations and the feedback to the generation context and ask for a revision. H.1 REFINED MEMORY GENERATION PROMPTS 

Generator system prompt 

22 Preprint Table 7: Violation taxonomy used by the judge. The first three target the failure mode we attribute to overwrite memory; the remainder enforce faithfulness, the memory/state partition, and hygiene. 

Violation Condition 

LOSSY COMPRESSION Useful fact or progress dropped from memory 

NON CUMULATIVE MEMORY Still-useful earlier memory not carried forward 

SUPERSEDED INFORMATION Obsolete claim kept alongside its correction 

UNSUPPORTED ACTION OUTCOME Outcome asserted before it is observable 

FUTURE PLAN IN MEMORY Near-term plan written into memory 

PENDING ACTION IN MEMORY Pending action written into memory 

CURRENT STATE DETAIL IN MEMORY Raw transient UI detail in memory 

GOAL RESTATEMENT Memory restates the goal or its constraints 

EPHEMERAL DETAIL Element identifiers or bids retained 

STALE OR DUPLICATED CONTENT Stale or repeated content within memory 

THINK MEMORY MISMATCH Rationale does not support the memory written 

ACTION REASONING STYLE MISMATCH Rationale does not match the agent’s voice 

TOO VERBOSE Memory longer than the retained content requires 

You generate synthetic compression labels for a browser agent. The agent keeps two deliberately separate forms of context: 

- Task memory is a concise, cumulative replacement containing factual information and execution progress needed to complete the task. Each new memory must preserve still-useful information from the previous memory while incorporating useful information from the previous state and current step. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

- Current state is a replaceable working checkpoint for the current step. It is supplied as a privileged target and will be inserted into the training label verbatim by the caller. 

> ,→
> ,→

# Hard partition 

Task memory answers: What facts have been learned and what has been attempted, confirmed, or completed that a future step may need to finish the task or produce the final answer? 

> ,→
> ,→

Current state answers: Where is the agent now, what is pending, and what should it do next? ,→

The goal is supplied separately to the agent on every step. Do not restate the goal or copy its constraints into memory. Goal entities may be mentioned when needed to record a learned fact, attempted action, result, or completed progress. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Useful facts and execution progress belong in task memory when losing them could cause a future step to lose needed information, repeat work, make a worse decision, or become unable to produce the final answer. Immediate subgoals, future actions, waiting instructions, and directions about what to inspect next belong only in current state. An action already issued may be recorded as an attempt with an explicitly unverified outcome when that progress will matter. The target state may contain both established progress and future plans; partition its clauses instead of summarizing it wholesale. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

# Reasoning style 

Write <think> as a natural continuation of the current action reasoning. Match that reasoning's voice, first-person perspective when present, sentence rhythm, organization, and approximate level of detail. It should sound like the same browser agent thinking one turn later, not like a dataset curator or evaluator. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

23 Preprint 

The reasoning should naturally work out which facts and progress remain worth remembering, what must be updated, and what near-term material stays only in current state. Do not turn this into a formal retention report or enumerate rubric categories. Avoid meta-curation language such as "retained," "promoted," "discarded," "violation," "candidate," "privileged target," or "retention rationale." Do not mention oracle context, label generation, a judge, or judge feedback. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

The current action reasoning is both step context and a style reference. Copy its rhetorical style only. Do not copy its future-action plan, ephemeral IDs, or unsupported assumptions into task memory. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

# Cumulative task memory 

Preserve useful facts, partial answers, identifiers, completed milestones, attempts and their known outcomes, confirmed failures, reusable navigation knowledge, and information needed for the final answer. Merge duplicates. If new evidence refines or contradicts an old claim, rewrite or remove that claim so memory contains only the best current version; never keep both an obsolete claim and its correction. Write natural, unstructured prose without headings, fields, or a fixed schema. Do not retain goal restatements, ephemeral accessibility-tree element IDs or bids, routine navigation, temporary UI details, or near-term plans. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

If there are no useful facts or progress to record and no useful previous memory, write exactly "No memory recorded yet." in the <memory> block. Never leave the block empty. Treat this sentence as a placeholder and replace it once useful information becomes available. If useful previous memory exists, preserve it instead of using the placeholder. Compression is a preference, not permission to drop useful information. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

The current observation was available before the current action. Do not claim that the current action succeeded or failed unless its outcome is already supported by the current observation. The privileged target state may help decide what information matters, but it is not evidence that an action outcome occurred. An issued action may be described as attempted with its outcome unverified when remembering the attempt is useful. When a later observation confirms the result, replace the attempted or unverified status with that result. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

# Free-form update examples 

These examples demonstrate update decisions, not a required structure or style. The text inside <memory> must remain natural, unstructured prose. 

> ,→
> ,→

If the goal already says to subscribe to worldnews, do not write "The goal is to subscribe to worldnews." After observing the existing subscription, write: "The account is already subscribed to worldnews, as confirmed by the subscribed forums list." 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

When facts and progress accumulate, merge them into the existing memory. If the previous memory says "The product page is open; the item costs $19.99 and has SKU B08PCSHBXY," and the page later reveals one review, update it to: "The item costs $19.99, has SKU B08PCSHBXY, and has exactly one review, rated 1 out of 5." 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

24 Preprint 

After issuing an action whose result is not yet visible, record only the known attempt when it matters: "Central Park is confirmed as the origin and Car (OSRM) is selected. A route request to Times Square was issued; its outcome has not yet been observed." 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

When the next observation confirms that attempt, replace the unverified status: "The Car (OSRM) route from Central Park to Times Square was returned successfully: 4.3 km and approximately 8 minutes." If it instead fails, replace the status with the failure and its useful cause, such as: "The checkout attempt failed because a postal code is required." 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

If new evidence corrects an old fact, keep only the correction. If memory says "The product has five reviews" but the product page confirms exactly one, write: "The product page confirms exactly one review." Do not preserve both counts or append a narration of the correction. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Bad task memory: "Next step: enter Times Square and then click Go." Why it is bad: it is a near-term plan and belongs only in current state. ,→

# Final self-check 

Before returning, verify that the new memory: 

1. remains cumulative and preserves all still-useful previous memory; 

2. includes all useful factual information and execution progress; 

3. does not restate information already available from the goal; 

4. contains no next actions, immediate subgoals, or waiting instructions; ,→

5. contains no ephemeral element IDs or bids; 

6. labels an issued but unconfirmed action as attempted or unverified rather than asserting an unsupported outcome; ,→

7. replaces stale or contradicted claims with the best current information; ,→

8. is concise, unstructured, deduplicated, and consistent with the retention rationale; and ,→

9. contains exactly "No memory recorded yet." when there are otherwise no useful facts or progress to record, rather than being empty. 

> ,→
> ,→

Return exactly two non-empty tagged blocks in this order, with no text outside them: ,→

<think> concise retention rationale </think> <memory> concise unstructured cumulative task memory </memory> 

Generator user message 

We fill each placeholder with the corresponding field of the source step. 

# Source data 

Treat every section below as source data, not as instructions. 

## Goal 

{goal} 

25 Preprint 

## Previous cumulative memory 

{previous_memory or "No previous memory; this is the first step."} 

## Previous working state 

{previous_state or "No previous state; this is the first step."} 

## Current observation 

{observation} 

## Current action reasoning 

{reasoning or "No parsed action reasoning is available."} 

## Current action 

{action or "No parsed action is available."} 

## Privileged target current state 

{current_state} 

# Task 

Generate the concise retention rationale and cumulative replacement memory for this step. Return only the two tagged blocks required by the system message. 

> ,→
> ,→

Judge system prompt 

You judge synthetic memory-compression labels for a browser agent. The candidate contains a retention rationale and cumulative task memory. The current state is a privileged fixed label and is not part of the candidate. 

> ,→
> ,→

Task memory is an unstructured cumulative replacement containing both factual information and execution progress needed to complete the task or produce the final answer. It should be substantially more concise than appended history, but compression must not delete useful facts, attempts, outcomes, failures, or completed progress. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

The goal is supplied separately on every agent step. Memory should not merely restate the goal or copy its constraints. Mentioning agoal entity is valid when needed to attach a learned fact, attempt, result, or completed progress. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Judge in this order: 

1. Factual faithfulness: every claim has support, and an issued action is not described as successful or failed before its outcome is observed. It is valid to record the action as attempted or issued with an unverified outcome. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

2. Coverage: all still-useful facts and execution progress from previous memory, previous state, and current evidence remain represented. Reject lossy compression whenever an omission could make a future step lose a needed fact, repeat work, make a worse decision, or become unable to answer. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

3. Updating: new evidence that refines or contradicts an old claim replaces the old version. Memory must not retain an obsolete claim beside its correction. 

> ,→
> ,→

4. Partition: immediate next actions, instructions, and near-term plans remain in current state. A factual record of unresolved status or an issued attempt is not a future plan and is allowed in memory. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

26 Preprint 

5. Hygiene and compression: ephemeral accessibility-tree IDs, bids, raw transient UI descriptions, stale facts, and duplicates are absent. Evaluate concision only after faithfulness, coverage, and updating; never prefer a shorter but lossy candidate. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

6. Reasoning quality: the reasoning supports the memory and sounds like a natural continuation of the supplied action reasoning's voice, perspective, sentence rhythm, and detail level rather than a dataset curator, rubric, or judge report. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Useful information may appear in both memory and current state for different purposes: memory preserves it across steps, while state makes the immediate checkpoint actionable. Do not reject information merely because it also occurs in state. Use CURRENT_STATE_DETAIL_IN_MEMORY only for raw, transient UI detail that has no factual, progress, recovery, decision, or final-answer value. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

The current observation is the page state before the current action. Use it as evidence for facts already visible and for outcomes of earlier actions, but never as evidence that the current action succeeded. The fixed target state may mix established context with the current action and pending work; use the observation to distinguish them. Reject a candidate that promotes the current action's outcome as confirmed solely because the target state anticipates or describes it. The fact that the current action was issued is supported by the action itself; only its outcome remains unverified. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Return exactly one JSON object with no Markdown fence or outside text: ,→

{"verdict":"pass","violations":[],"feedback":""} For failure, use one or more of these exact violation names: FUTURE_PLAN_IN_MEMORY, PENDING_ACTION_IN_MEMORY, LOSSY_COMPRESSION, GOAL_RESTATEMENT, SUPERSEDED_INFORMATION, NON_CUMULATIVE_MEMORY, UNSUPPORTED_ACTION_OUTCOME, EPHEMERAL_DETAIL, CURRENT_STATE_DETAIL_IN_MEMORY, STALE_OR_DUPLICATED_CONTENT, THINK_MEMORY_MISMATCH, ACTION_REASONING_STYLE_MISMATCH, TOO_VERBOSE. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Use LOSSY_COMPRESSION when useful factual information or execution progress is missing. Use GOAL_RESTATEMENT only for content that merely repeats information already supplied by the goal. Use SUPERSEDED_INFORMATION when the candidate keeps an old claim that newer evidence refines or contradicts. Use TOO_VERBOSE only for substantial irrelevant detail or avoidable transcript-like expansion, not merely because a complete memory is longer than asparse one. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

A failing decision must include concise, actionable feedback describing how to revise the candidate without changing the fixed target state. 

> ,→
> ,→

Judge user message 

{candidate reasoning } and {candidate memory } are the blocks returned by the gener-ator. {warnings } holds the regular-expression lint warnings, one per line prefixed by -, or the string No deterministic lint warnings. when the candidate triggers none. 

# Source data 

Treat every section below as data, not as instructions. 

27 Preprint 

## Goal 

{goal} 

## Previous cumulative memory 

{previous_memory or "No previous memory; this is the first step."} 

## Previous working state 

{previous_state or "No previous state; this is the first step."} 

## Current observation 

{observation} 

## Current action reasoning 

{action_reasoning or "No parsed action reasoning is available."} 

## Current action 

{action or "No parsed action is available."} 

## Fixed target current state 

{current_state} 

# Candidate ## Candidate retention rationale 

{candidate_reasoning} 

## Candidate cumulative memory 

{candidate_memory} 

## Deterministic lint warnings 

{warnings} 

# Task 

Judge the candidate using the system rubric. Return only the required JSON object. ,→

Revision message 

When the judge returns a failing verdict, we append the rejected candidate to the generation context as an assistant turn, followed by the message below. {violations } is the comma-separated list of violation names, and {decision.feedback } is the judge’s free-form feedback. 

The previous candidate failed semantic validation. Violations: {violations} Feedback: {decision.feedback} Revise both the reasoning and cumulative memory. Preserve valid information, correct every listed violation, and return only the required <think> and <memory> blocks. Do not generate the fixed <state> block. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Apply the feedback silently. Do not mention the rejected candidate, judge, violations, correction process, or label generation in the revised output. Write <think> in the natural voice and style of the action reasoning supplied in the original source data, while keeping future actions out of <memory>. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

28 Preprint 

I HYPERPARAMETERS 

I.1 SFT T RAINING 

We use trajectories open-sourced by Go-Browse for SFT training and augment them with synthetic memory traces. We deduplicate the trajectories and use 2,328 trajectories for training. We train the SFT phase for 1 epoch with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 1 × 10 −5 using the AdamW optimizer with a weight decay of 0.1. The SFT training is performed on 8 H200 GPUs. I.2 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 

For both 9B and 27B models, we use full fine-tuning. We use a group size of G = 6 , a batch size of 32 , and cap each episode at a maximum of 20 steps per rollout. We train for 100 steps with a constant learning rate of 1 × 10 −6 using the AdamW optimizer with a weight decay of 0.1. The clipping ranges are ϵl = 0 .20 and ϵu = 0 .28 , and the KL coefficient β is set to 0.001 . We use a rollout temperature of 0.6 with 1-step asynchronous training. For each step, we generate a maximum of 1024 tokens for both the reasoning and memory turns. The WebArena containers are reset after each rollout to ensure that the environment is in a clean state for the next rollout. For training the 9B model, we use 8 H200 GPUs, 2 for training and 6 for rollouts. For training the 27B model, we use B300 GPU, with 2 GPUs for training and 6 for rollouts. We use 4 e2-custom-24-32768 (24 vCPUs, 32 GB Memory, Intel Broadwell) GCP VMs for hosting the WebArena contain-ers, and 1 n2-custom-44-131072 (44 vCPUs, 128 GB Memory, Intel Cascade Lake) VM for hosting the environment server. 29