Title: VideoTapestry: Query-Adaptive Memory Refinement for Multi-Agent Long-Video Understanding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.06672v1

Published Time: Tue, 06 Oct 2026 03:24:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# VIDEO TAPESTRY : Q UERY -A DAPTIVE MEMORY 

# REFINEMENT FOR MULTI -A GENT LONG -V IDEO 

# UNDERSTANDING 

Yucheng Liu 1, 2 , Yufei Yin 3, Mingxiao Feng 4, Jiajun Deng 1, 4, † ,Wengang Zhou 1, 4 , Houqiang Li 1, 4 

> 1

University of Science and Technology of China 

> 2

Jilin University 

> 3

Hangzhou Dianzi University 

> 4

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center 

ABSTRACT 

Long-video understanding places substantial demands on memory, as answering questions often requires retrieving information distributed across extended tem-poral spans. Existing approaches broadly follow two paradigms: query-driven exploration, which is sensitive to localization errors, and query-independent mem-ory construction, which may omit question-specific details. We introduce Video-Tapestry , a training-free multi-agent framework that adapts a preconstructed hier-archical video memory through coarse-to-fine, query-driven refinement. The pre-constructed memory organizes video content into three levels, capturing global narrative context, event-level temporal structure, and fine-grained relational ev-idence, respectively. To support coarse-to-fine localization and observation, we assign a specialized agent to each level, keeping retrieval and refinement within a scale-specific context. Guided by the query, these agents revisit relevant video regions and enrich layer-wise memories with targeted multimodal observations. Their refinements are assembled according to the original hierarchy into a com-posite query-adaptive memory, preserving global context in a compact form while retaining fine-grained evidence along query-relevant branches for final reasoning. Compared with direct GPT-5.5 inference, VideoTapestry achieves absolute ac-curacy gains of 17.2%, 14.9%, 9.8%, and 7.0% on LVBench, LongVideoBench (Long), Video-MME (Long), and EgoSchema, respectively, achieving the state-of-the-art results among all competitors. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Long-video understanding is a fundamental capability for vision-language models (VLMs) reason-ing over extended activities, narratives, and real-world interactions (Fu et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025a; Mangalam et al., 2023). Compared with short clips, answering questions about hour-long videos requires preserving global context while locating decisive evidence at appropriate semantic granularity. Uniform sampling may miss brief events, while dense frame sampling intro-duces redundancy and query-irrelevant information, making relevant content difficult to isolate (Ye et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025b; Wu et al., 2024). These challenges motivate memory mechanisms that organize video information for selective retrieval while preserving context for reasoning. Existing approaches broadly fall into two paradigms. As shown in Figure 1(a), top-down methods start from the query and inspect relevant intervals, constructing or updating hierarchical memory dur-ing search (Wang et al., 2025b; Ye et al., 2025; Yin et al., 2026; Lin et al., 2026a). This enables adap-tive observation, but inaccurate localization may direct the search away from key video segments. Bottom-up methods, as illustrated in Figure 1(b), construct a query-independent video memory and 

This work was performed when Yucheng Liu was a research intern at USTC. † Corresponding author 

1arXiv:2610.06672v1 [cs.CV] 5 Oct 2026 (1) Build query-independent video memory   

> After Jerry slips out of Tom's hands, where doe s he land ?

……… …            

> Rivalry Tom–Jerry Chase Sheltr ·Mallet ·Teapot ·Firework
> After Jerry slips out of Tom's hands, where doe s he land ? Static Composite (1) Build query -independent video memory
> (a)
> Top-Down Query-Driven Exploration (b) Bottom-Up Retrieval-Based Memory
> (2) Query static memory at inference time
> (1) Use the query to search clips (2) Use Retrieved Clip as Context
> (c) Composite Query-Adaptive Memory
> (2) Forming query-adaptive memory (3) Answer with composite memory
> Revisit Based on Prior Observations After Jerry slips out of Tom's hands, where does he land ?
> Answer : Beside his mouse hole. Answer : Not Previously Stored.
> Localization Error !
> GT Answer-Critical Frames :
> Answer : On a wooden crate.

Figure 1: Comparison of long-video context construction paradigms. Left: Top-down explo-ration may miss answer-critical evidence due to localization errors. Middle: Bottom-up memory provides broad coverage but may omit query-specific details. Right: VideoTapestry combines a query-independent hierarchy with targeted revisiting to form a composite query-adaptive memory that preserves global context and enriches relevant evidence. retrieve or revisit relevant content at inference time (Fan et al., 2024; Zuo et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2026; Yeo et al., 2026). Such representations provide broad coverage but may omit details required by specific questions. Intuitively, the paradigms are complementary: query-independent memory provides broad coverage, while query-driven exploration acquires question-specific evidence. However, integrating query-specific evidence with existing memory while preserving global con-text remains challenging. Integrating the strengths of the two paradigms requires incorporating new evidence into memory while limiting irrelevant content. This process involves global localization, temporal narrowing, and fine-grained verification. These complementary reasoning objectives mo-tivate specialized agents that refine memory at corresponding semantic levels and pass inspection objectives between levels. Motivated by these considerations, we introduce VideoTapestry , a training-free multi-agent frame-work that keeps a preconstructed hierarchy fixed while transforming it into a composite query-adaptive memory through coarse-to-fine, query-driven refinement. The central problem we address is how to adapt a query-independent hierarchical memory to a specific question without sacrificing its global coverage, while selectively acquiring and integrating fine-grained evidence that is missing or insufficient in the original memory. The paradigm of VideoTapestry is illustrated in Figure 1(c). The memory consists of SuperEvents, MacroEvents, and local Subgraphs, representing global stages, localized events, and fine-grained relational evidence. The Overview, Skim, and Focus agents operate at these levels, respectively, each within a scale-specific context. Guided by candidate memories and upstream inspection objectives, each agent acquires targeted multimodal evidence, refines a temporary layer memory, and decides whether to stop or pass selected branches and unresolved inspection objectives to the next level. At the Super level, relevant descriptions and their neighboring context are retained and enriched, while the remaining events are summarized to preserve global coverage. Along selected branches, MacroEvent and Subgraph descriptions are refined with question-specific evidence. These layer-wise memories are assembled according to their original parent-child relations and paired with a concise query-time trace of inspection objectives and stopping decisions. The resulting composite query-adaptive memory combines a refined global scaffold with selectively refined local paths, 2preserving global context while retaining detailed query-relevant evidence. All refinements are query-specific and leave the preconstructed memory unchanged. An independent Answer Agent generates the final prediction from the assembled memory without further retrieval or observation. We evaluate VideoTapestry on LVBench, LongVideoBench, Video-MME, and EgoSchema against representative direct VLM baselines and agentic approaches. Using GPT-5.5 as the base VLM, VideoTapestry improves accuracy over direct GPT-5.5 inference by 17.2, 14.9, 9.8, and 7.0 percent-age points on LVBench, LongVideoBench (Long), Video-MME (Long), and EgoSchema, respec-tively. It achieves the best reported results among the compared methods across all four benchmarks. Controlled ablation studies further demonstrate the effectiveness of query-adaptive memory refine-ment and scale-aligned multi-agent collaboration. Our contributions are threefold: • We propose a query-adaptive memory strategy that integrates newly observed evidence into selected branches while preserving global context and the original hierarchical structure. • We develop VideoTapestry , a training-free multi-agent framework that aligns agents with memory levels and coordinates refinement through branch selection and inspection-objective transfer. • We demonstrate consistent improvements across four video understanding benchmarks, with controlled ablations and cross-backbone evaluations supporting the effectiveness of memory refinement and scale-aligned collaboration. 

2 RELATED WORK 

2.1 LONG -V IDEO UNDERSTANDING 

Long-video understanding extends the scope of VLM reasoning from short clips to complex real-world streams lasting many minutes or even hours. Recent work expands visual context win-dows, compresses redundant spatiotemporal tokens, and scales long-form instruction tuning through LongVU (Shen et al., 2024), LongViTU (Wu et al., 2025), and Hour-LLaVA (Lin et al., 2026b). Video Panels and Tempo further improve effective temporal coverage via frame grids and query-aware visual compression (Doorenbos et al., 2026; Fei et al., 2026). Despite these advances, prac-tical context budgets still limit reliable evidence coverage, motivating agentic and memory-based methods that organize video content externally and acquire evidence through query-conditioned re-trieval and observation (Fan et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2026; Chen et al., 2026). 2.2 HIERARCHICAL VIDEO MEMORY 

Video memory systems store frame descriptions, clips, or temporal segments outside the model context, while hierarchical and graph-based variants organize them across multiple semantic levels and explicit relations (Long et al., 2026; Yeo et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2025b; Zuo et al., 2026; Yin et al., 2026). PyraVid uses structure-guided expansion and pruning (Yan et al., 2026b), while VAM aligns temporal and spatial evidence (Li et al., 2026a). MAGIC-Video combines multimodal graph retrieval with narrative chains (Li et al., 2026b), while MERIT uses multi-key episodic retrieval with selective query-time filtering (Choi et al., 2026). VideoTapestry adapts a query-independent hierarchy through targeted re-observation, retaining a compact global scaffold and refined query-relevant branches in a composite query-adaptive memory. 2.3 AGENTIC AND MULTI -A GENT VIDEO REASONING 

Agentic video systems replace one-pass prediction with planning, temporal search, retrieval, and selective observation (Fan et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2026; Lin et al., 2026a). Active Video Perception plans observations and checks evidence sufficiency (Wang et al., 2026b), while LensWalk controls temporal scope and sampling density (Li et al., 2026c). Route2Look routes queries among global browsing, temporal grounding, and semantic retrieval via a routing skill (Wang et al., 2026a). VideoXAgent acquires multimodal evidence online through expert tools (Yang et al., 2026). Multi-agent approaches distribute perception, localization, verification, and reasoning across 3Video & Question Input 

> What is the focus of standard thyroid treatment according to the video? A. The standard treatment is to only check TSH. B. The standard treatment is to monitor T3 levels exclusively. C. The standard treatment involves using a combination of T3 and T4 medications. D. The standard treatment is to adjust medication based solely on symptoms without testing.

identify 

Hierarchical Memory and Multi-Agent Organization   

> Reason:
> Overview/Skim: The retrieved memory locates the Standard Thyroid Treatment section and repeatedly highlights TSH and its reference ranges.
> Focus/New Observation: TSH is circled, and the slide states “HIGH TSH MEANS A SLOW THYROID.” Synthroid is linked to T4, with no T3-combination evidence.

Layer-Wise Tool-Augmented Memory Refinement 

Plan 

> Retrieval Agent

Overview Skim Focus 

Stage 3: Dynamic Memory Generation Stage 1: Observation Tool Pre-Constructed 

Hierarchical Memory 

Stage 2: Update Tool Observation Update Select 

User Query  

> Step 1: Super-level coarse retrieval Step 2: Macro-level contextual retrieval Step 3: Subgraph-level Fine-Grained Retrieval

Composite Query-Adaptive Memory Final Prediction    

> Start time: 180.0 s End time: 436.0 s
> Observation instruction:
> Inspect the “Standard Thyroid Treatment”.
> Observation result: Update instruction:
> Update super_02 with the verified TSH-focused evidence.
> Super super_02| time_range=[96.0, 436.0]

…

Super Event Macro Event 

Subgraph Event/Entity 

> The answer is A. Query-Guided Memory-Augmented

L1: Super Event 

L2: Macro Event L3: Subgraph Event 

> Downstream Instruction Downstream Instruction
> Locate Standard Treatment ：
> Select super_02; inspect treatment.
> Narrow TSH Pathway ：
> Select macro_0004; verify TSH focus.
> Verify Medication Evidence ：
> Repeated TSH; Synthroid→T4; no T3.
> [New observation]
> The “Standard Thyroid Treatment” section repeatedly emphasizes TSH and its reference ranges. The slide explicitly states that high TSH indicates a slow thyroid.Synthroid is linked to T4, while no T3 medication is shown. The verified evidence indicates that the standard approach is primarily TSH-centered.

lmage Tool ASR Tool Figure 2: Overview of VideoTapestry. Scale-aligned agents operate over a preconstructed hier-archical video memory, while layer-wise tool-augmented refinement selectively incorporates newly acquired query-relevant observations at different semantic levels. The resulting refined layer mem-ories are hierarchically assembled into a composite query-adaptive memory for final prediction. specialized roles (Yan et al., 2026a; Rege et al., 2026; Zuo et al., 2026). VideoTapestry focuses on final hierarchical representation: scale-aligned agents retain a global scaffold, refine query-relevant branches, and assemble layer-wise memories for an independent Answer Agent. 

3 METHOD 

Given a long video V , a question q, and answer options o, VideoTapestry transforms a preconstructed hierarchical video memory into a composite query-adaptive memory. Three scale-aligned agents acquire evidence and refine temporary layer memories, which are then assembled for an independent Answer Agent (Figure 2). 3.1 QUERY -A DAPTIVE MEMORY AND SCALE -A LIGNED ORGANIZATION 

Query-adaptive memory representation. VideoTapestry constructs a query-adaptive reasoning context by compressing unrelated SuperEvents, enriching relevant descriptions with new observa-tions, and assembling refined descendants under their original parents. These operations modify only temporary textual representations while preserving the underlying static hierarchy. We instantiate a fixed query-independent hierarchy following the memory-construction procedure of MemDreamer (Chen et al., 2026), upon which VideoTapestry performs query-adaptive refinement. The hierarchy G = ( V, E) contains three semantic levels: 

Mstatic = {M S

static , MM

static , MG

static }.

SuperEvents summarize coarse temporal stages, MacroEvents describe localized coherent events, and each MacroEvent is associated with a complete local Subgraph containing Entity, Event, and OCRText nodes connected by typed relations. The levels S, M , and G provide global narrative context, event-level temporal structure, and fine-grained factual evidence, respectively. 

Scale-aligned multi-agent organization. The Overview Agent refines the Super-level scaffold and selects relevant stages; the Skim Agent examines their MacroEvents and narrows candidate regions; and the Focus Agent inspects the corresponding Subgraphs for fine-grained verification. 4Each agent operates within a scale-specific context, with selected parent identifiers determining which descendants are exposed at the next level. At level ℓ ∈ { S, M, G }, the agent produces a temporary refined memory, selected identifiers, a downstream instruction, and a stop flag: 

 fMℓq , Sℓ, Iℓ, z ℓ

= Aℓ

 q, o, s V , Mℓ

> static

[Cℓ], Iℓ−1, Tℓ

 .

Here, sV , Cℓ, Iℓ−1, and Tℓ denote the global video summary, candidate nodes, upstream instruction, and level-specific tools, respectively. If refinement continues, the selected identifiers define Cℓ+1 =S 

> v∈S ℓ

Children( v, G), which the next agent loads from static memory. The instruction Iℓ conveys the inspection objective and may summarize intermediate findings and unresolved evidence needs without transmitting the full preceding-layer memory or tool trajectory. The validated stop flag zℓ determines whether refinement terminates. In the evaluated Video-MME configuration, global questions may terminate at an intermediate level, whereas non-global questions must descend when valid descendants are available. The Focus Agent always terminates exploration. The question-type heuristic and decision validation rules are detailed in Appendix B.2. 3.2 LAYER -W ISE TOOL -A UGMENTED MEMORY REFINEMENT 

All agents follow the Plan ℓ → Observe ℓ → Update ℓ → Decide ℓ protocol. Plan identifies evidence needs, Observe inspects selected intervals, Update integrates new evidence into temporary memory, and Decide selects the next scope or terminates. Across all benchmarks, each visited layer performs one refinement batch, followed by one layer-level decision (Appendix B.2). All levels access the source video through a Visual Observation Tool: 

T ℓ

> vis

 Wℓ

> vis

, Iℓ

> obs

 → O vis ,ℓ q , ℓ ∈ { S, M, G },

where Wℓ 

> vis

denotes a set of temporal intervals, Iℓ 

> obs

specifies what to inspect, and Ovis ,ℓ q contains the resulting observations. The Overview Agent additionally accesses a Transcript/ASR Tool: 

Ttxt (Wtxt , Itxt ) → O txt  

> q

,

which extracts spoken-information evidence from timestamped text within selected windows. In the evaluated Video-MME configuration, it uses Whisper transcripts and follows visual observation on each successful Overview pass. The Skim and Focus Agents use visual observations only. 3.2.1 OVERVIEW AGENT : S UPER -L EVEL MEMORY REFINEMENT 

The Overview Agent accesses all SuperEvents. For local questions, it decomposes the localization objective into atomic targets. Entity, OCR-text, and semantic retrieval interfaces provided by the preconstructed memory (Chen et al., 2026) yield temporal anchors for observation; retrieval outputs serve as localization hints rather than verified answer evidence. A visual planner converts these anchors into an inspection instruction and a continuous observation window bounded by the video duration. Sampled frames are arranged into grids for T S

> vis

. In the evaluated Video-MME configuration, a subsequent ASR planner uses the SuperEvent timeline and visual results to select transcript windows and formulate a spoken-information request. The resulting observations are 

OSq = Ovis ,S q ∪ O txt  

> q

.

Observations are associated with SuperEvents using candidate identifiers and temporal overlap. Let 

Cev index the evidence-associated SuperEvents in temporal order. A protected set includes these events and their immediate neighbors: 

P = [

> i∈C ev

{i − 1, i, i + 1 }

!

∩ { 1, . . . , N S },

where NS is the number of SuperEvents. 5The Overview Agent updates the Super-level memory asymmetrically. Protected nodes retain their original descriptions and receive available associated evidence, while the remaining nodes are com-pressed: 

emSi =

(mSi ⊕ [Visual] vi ⊕ [Transcript] ai ⊕ [Evidence] ei, i ∈ P ,c(mSi ), i / ∈ P .

Here, mSi is the original description, vi contains visual observations, ai contains transcript-derived facts, and ei contains timestamped verbatim transcript evidence. The operator ⊕ denotes textual composition, and c(·) produces a compact summary. Unavailable evidence fields are omitted. The protected set is enforced programmatically: protected neighbors without associated observations retain their original text. This refined global scaffold combines video-wide coverage with query-relevant detail. The agent then selects SuperEvents and a downstream instruction, or terminates according to the validated stopping rule. 3.2.2 SKIM AGENT : M ACRO -L EVEL MEMORY REFINEMENT 

The Skim Agent operates on CM = S 

> v∈S S

Children( v, G), the MacroEvent children of the selected SuperEvents. Guided by the upstream instruction, it plans observations within candidate intervals and associates the resulting evidence with the covered nodes. For each requested update, it rewrites the original description: 

gtext Mi = Rewrite M

 text Mi , q, o, IS , OMi

 .

The rewrite preserves relevant static facts, incorporates observed evidence, and compresses unre-lated content. Missing or invalid updates retain the original text. Node identifiers, parent relations, semantic levels, and temporal ranges remain fixed. The agent then selects MacroEvents and gener-ates an instruction for finer inspection, subject to the stopping rule. 3.2.3 FOCUS AGENT : S UBGRAPH -L EVEL MEMORY REFINEMENT 

The Focus Agent loads local Subgraphs associated with the selected MacroEvents, exposing entities, events, OCR content, and typed relations. Guided by the upstream instruction, it plans fine-grained visual inspection and rewrites the serialized description of each requested Subgraph: 

gtext Gi = Rewrite G

 text Gi , q, o, IM , OGi

 .

This operation modifies the temporary textual description rather than the underlying graph nodes or edges. As at the Macro level, missing or invalid updates retain the original text. The Focus Agent then terminates hierarchical exploration. 3.3 COMPOSITE MEMORY ASSEMBLY AND ANSWER GENERATION 

The key representation in VideoTapestry is a composite query-adaptive memory combining a refined global scaffold with selectively refined local paths. After traversal, Assemble retains the refined Super-level scaffold and places selected refined MacroEvent and Subgraph memories beneath their original parents, preserving video-wide coverage while enriching query-relevant branches. The resulting memory is serialized with the question, options, and a compact handoff trace: 

Dq = Serialize 



q, o, H q , Assemble 

n fMℓq

o

> ℓ∈L q

 

.

Here, Lq ⊆ { S, M, G } denotes the visited levels, and Hq = [( aℓ, i ℓ)] ℓ∈L q records each agent and its handoff instruction or stopping marker. The trace may summarize intermediate findings and unresolved evidence needs, but excludes complete observation and update logs. The independent Answer Agent predicts 

by = Aans (q, o, Dq )

without further retrieval or observation. 6Table 1: Comparison with representative VLMs and agentic approaches on four long-video under-standing benchmarks. Results are reported as accuracy (%). Green parenthesized values denote percentage-point gains over GPT-5.5 (Direct). † denotes our same-backbone end-to-end evaluation with frozen GPT-5.5. ‡ denotes results from our reproduction. w/o: no provided subtitles. 

Method Query-time Model(s) LVBench LongVideoBench Video-MME(w/o) EgoSchema Overall Val Long Long Val 

Direct Proprietary VLMs 

Gemini-2.5-Pro Gemini-2.5-Pro 72.0 71.0 68.6 75.9 72.8 Gemini-3.1-Pro Gemini-3.1-Pro 78.2 78.6 77.0 80.3 76.4 OpenAI o3 OpenAI o3 57.1 66.7 60.6 64.7 63.2 

Direct Open-Source VLMs 

Seed1.5VL Seed1.5VL-Thinking 64.6 – 74.4 – –Qwen3-VL Qwen3-VL-235B-A22B-Thinking 63.6 71.4 67.1 71.2 75.9 Qwen3.5 Qwen3.5-35B-A3B 71.3 – – 62.6 –GLM-4.6V GLM-4.6V-106B-A12B 59.5 67.6 58.7 66.0 68.8 

Agentic Methods 

DVD OpenAI o3 74.2 71.6 68.6 67.3 76.6 Symphony DeepSeek-R1 + Seed1.6VL 71.8 77.1 – 78.1 –VideoARM o3 + GPT-4.1 79.7 73.7 69.2 75.3 78.2 VideoARM o3 + GPT-4o – 78.0 76.4 81.2 76.2 Active Video Perception Gemini-2.5-Pro 74.8 73.4 70.0 81.9 –WorldMM-GPT OpenAI GPT-5 61.9 – – 76.6 –VideoSeek OpenAI GPT-5 68.4 – 73.5 70.1 –LensWalk OpenAI GPT-5 66.9 – 68.8 69.2 74.6 Route2Look OpenAI GPT-5 75.4 – 77.8 76.1 –VideoXAgent Claude-Opus-4.6 + Gemini-3.1-Pro-preview 76.5 – 78.1 – –MemDreamer ‡ OpenAI GPT-5.5 73.3 74.1 73.9 77.1 78.6 

Same-Backbone End-to-End Comparison 

GPT-5.5 (Direct) † OpenAI GPT-5.5 64.3 69.8 64.0 74.8 76.0 

VideoTapestry † OpenAI GPT-5.5 81.5 (+ 17.2 ) 80.4 (+ 10.6 ) 78.9 (+ 14.9 ) 84.6 (+ 9.8 ) 83.0 (+ 7.0 )

4 EXPERIMENTS 

4.1 BENCHMARKS 

We evaluate VideoTapestry on four long-video understanding benchmarks. LVBench comprises 103 videos ranging from 30 minutes to two hours and 1,549 QA pairs across six fine-grained di-mensions (Wang et al., 2025a). The LongVideoBench validation set contains 1,337 questions from 752 videos, including 564 questions from 188 long videos ranging from 15 to 60 minutes (Wu et al., 2024). Video-MME (Long) consists of 300 videos ranging from 30 to 60 minutes and 900 QA pairs (Fu et al., 2025). EgoSchema contains egocentric clips designed to evaluate video reasoning; for efficient and representative evaluation, we use a 500-question subset (Mangalam et al., 2023). 4.2 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

VideoTapestry is training-free, with all model parameters and the preconstructed hierarchical mem-ory fixed during evaluation. Unless noted otherwise, GPT-5.5 (OpenAI, 2026) serves as the back-bone for the Overview, Skim, Focus, and Answer agents, while Whisper (Radford et al., 2023) pro-vides ASR. Qwen3-Embedding (Zhang et al., 2025) supports semantic retrieval. The Direct baseline uses the same frozen backbone and evaluation examples without the agentic inference framework, serving as a same-backbone end-to-end comparison. Following VideoARM (Yin et al., 2026), all 7Table 2: Comparison with representative VLMs and agentic approaches across the six capability di-mensions of LVBench (accuracy, %). The best results are bolded; green parenthesized values denote absolute percentage-point gains over GPT-5.5 (Direct). ‡ denotes results from our reproduction. 

Method ER EU Rea KIR Sum TG Avg. 

Direct VLMs 

GPT-4o 48.9 49.5 50.3 48.1 50.0 40.9 48.9 OpenAI o3 57.6 56.4 50.8 62.9 67.2 46.8 57.1 GPT-5.5 (Direct) 63.2 66.0 72.7 63.8 65.4 43.1 64.3 

Structured and Agentic Methods 

VideoTree 30.3 25.1 31.9 26.5 25.5 27.7 28.8 VideoLucy 54.3 59.8 55.9 75.6 49.1 51.7 58.8 DVD 73.4 73.3 70.7 80.4 74.1 72.3 74.2 DVD + Transcripts 75.5 77.1 68.7 79.0 84.5 72.7 76.0 Symphony 70.0 69.4 69.4 77.2 72.5 70.1 71.8 Active Video Perception 71.9 76.7 67.7 80.1 75.9 73.6 74.8 MemDreamer (GPT-5.5) ‡ 70.5 74.9 73.5 80.1 67.3 67.7 73.3 

VideoTapestry (GPT-5.5) 80.7 (+ 17.5 ) 81.0 (+ 15.0 ) 77.6 (+ 4.9 ) 84.5 (+ 20.7 ) 89.7 (+ 24.3 ) 83.2 (+ 40.1 ) 81.5 (+ 17.2 )

ablations are conducted on a fixed 200-question subset of Video-MME Long. Additional evaluation and implementation settings are provided in Appendix B.1. 

Baselines. We compare with direct VLMs and agentic methods, including DVD (Zhang et al., 2026), Symphony (Yan et al., 2026a), VideoARM (Yin et al., 2026), Active Video Percep-tion (Wang et al., 2026b), WorldMM (Yeo et al., 2026), VideoSeek (Lin et al., 2026a), LensWalk (Li et al., 2026c), Route2Look (Wang et al., 2026a), VideoXAgent (Yang et al., 2026), and Mem-Dreamer (Chen et al., 2026). 4.3 MAIN RESULTS 

With frozen GPT-5.5, VideoTapestry gains 7.0–17.2 percentage points over the same-backbone Di-rect baseline and surpasses the strongest prior result in each column by 0.8–4.4 points (Table 1). It also leads across all six LVBench dimensions, with the largest same-backbone gains in temporal grounding (+40.1) and summarization (+24.3) (Table 2). These results suggest benefits for both long-range evidence localization and global information aggregation. The LVBench breakdown in Table 2 shows that VideoTapestry leads all six capability dimensions, improving over the strongest prior result by 3.9–9.6 points. The largest gains occur in temporal grounding (+9.6), supporting the effectiveness of coarse-to-fine retrieval and targeted observation for locating and verifying question-relevant evidence. 4.4 ABLATION STUDIES 

Following VideoARM (Yin et al., 2026), all controlled studies use its representative 200-question subset of Video-MME Long, which was constructed to preserve the distribution of the full bench-mark, and share the same preconstructed memory. 

Query-time memory refinement. Table 3(a) examines query-specific evidence acquisition and integration into hierarchical memory. The two observation ablations remove visual observation or selected-window ASR. Append-only Evidence retains the same tools and agent structure but provides new evidence as a flat log without updating selected memory nodes. Single Agent replaces the three scale-aligned agents with one controller under the same model- and tool-call budgets. Removing visual observation, ASR, structured memory refinement, and multi-agent collaboration reduces ac-curacy by 3.0, 5.5, 1.5, and 4.5 points, respectively. The largest drops come from removing ASR and scale-aligned collaboration, while structured memory refinement outperforms flat evidence logging. 8Table 3: Ablations of (a) query-time refinement and (b) composite memory components. Update denotes structured integration; M-A, scale-aligned multi-agent collaboration. ∆ Acc. denotes the percentage-point difference from VideoTapestry. In (b), refined variants share fixed exploration; Super/Paths denote retained components, and – static retrieval.                                                          

> (a) Query-time memory refinement
> Variant Visual ASR Update M-A Acc. ∆Acc. w/o Visual Observation NYYY84.0 −3.0
> w/o ASR Observation YNYY81.5 −5.5
> Append-only Evidence YYNY85.5 −1.5
> Single Agent YYYN82.5 −4.5
> VideoTapestry YYYY87.0 –
> (b) Composite Memory Components
> Memory Variant Super Paths Tokens Acc. Static Memory Only ––4,874 79.5 Refined Super Only YN3,250 85.0 Refined Paths Only NY1,363 80.5
> VideoTapestry YY4,417 87.0

Composite memory. Table 3(b) separates the static-retrieval baseline from a controlled compari-son of composite memory. Static Memory Only retrieves the preconstructed memory without query-time updates, compression, or rewriting, achieving 79.5%. For the refined variants, the full explo-ration is fixed, including selected nodes, observations, refined contents, and query-time trace; only the final memory given to the Answer Agent differs: Refined Super Only keeps the refined Super-level scaffold (85.0%), while Refined Paths Only keeps only refined Macro- and Subgraph-level paths (80.5%). Combining both components reaches 87.0%, outperforming either refined compo-nent and static retrieval by 7.5 percentage points, supporting their complementary roles. 4.5 BACKBONE GENERALIZATION 

Table 4 evaluates backbone generalization while keeping the memory and tool interfaces fixed. We replace the backbone used by the agents and Answer Agent with GPT-5.5, GPT-5, Qwen3.7-Plus, and Qwen3.6-27B (OpenAI, 2025; Al-ibaba Cloud, 2026; Qwen Team, 2026). Direct and VideoTapestry use the same backbone and evaluation examples. VideoTapestry improves every backbone by 7.0–9.5%, with the largest gain of 9.5% on Qwen3.6-27B. These consistent gains across GPT and Qwen show the method generalizes beyond a single model family. Table 4: Generalization across backbone models.                

> Backbone Direct VideoTapestry Improve. GPT-5.5 78.0 87.0 +9 .0
> GPT-5 75.5 82.5 +7 .0
> Qwen3.7-Plus 75.0 83.0 +8 .0
> Qwen3.6-27B 65.5 75.0 +9 .5

5 CONCLUSION 

We introduce VideoTapestry, a training-free hierarchical multi-agent framework for long-video un-derstanding. Starting from a query-independent hierarchical video memory, the Overview, Skim, and Focus agents perform coarse-to-fine retrieval and targeted observation, refining query-relevant content at complementary semantic granularities. Their layer-wise refinements are assembled with the global scaffold into a composite query-adaptive memory that preserves video-wide structure while enriching relevant branches for final reasoning. Experiments on long-video benchmarks show that VideoTapestry consistently improves over the same-backbone direct baseline and representative agentic methods, demonstrating the effectiveness of organizing global structure and query-specific evidence for final reasoning. 9REFERENCES 

Alibaba Cloud. Qwen3.7-Plus model info. Alibaba Cloud Model Studio Documentation, June 2026. URL https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/model-studio/ qwen3-7-plus .Cong Chen, Guo Gan, Kaixiang Ji, ZhaoYang Zhang, Zhen Yang, Guangming Yao, Hao Chen, Jingdong Chen, Yi Yuan, and Chunhua Shen. Memdreamer: Decoupling perception and reasoning for long video understanding via hierarchical graph memory and agentic retrieval mechanism. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.07512 , 2026. Yeeun Choi, Youngbeom Yoo, Joon-Young Lee, Hyolim Kang, and Seon Joo Kim. Keep it sim-ple: Multi-key episodic memory retrieval for ultra-long video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.07663 , 2026. Lars Doorenbos, Federico Spurio, and Juergen Gall. Video panels for long video understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 31293–31303, 2026. Yue Fan, Xiaojian Ma, Rujie Wu, Yuntao Du, Jiaqi Li, Zhi Gao, and Qing Li. Videoagent: A memory-augmented multimodal agent for video understanding. In European Conference on Com-puter Vision , pp. 75–92. Springer, 2024. Junjie Fei, Jun Chen, Zechun Liu, Yunyang Xiong, Chong Zhou, Wei Wen, Junlin Han, Mingchen Zhuge, Saksham Suri, Qi Qian, et al. Small vision-language models are smart compressors for long video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.08120 , 2026. Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yongdong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang, Chenyu Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, et al. Video-mme: The first-ever comprehensive eval-uation benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 24108–24118. IEEE, 2025. Aiden Yiliu Li, Nels Numan, and Anthony Steed. Visual agentic memory: Enabling online long video understanding via online indexing, hierarchical memory, and agentic retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.16481 , 2026a. Jiazheng Li, Chi-Hao Wu, Yunze Liu, Kaize Ding, Jundong Li, and Chuxu Zhang. Bridging modal-ities, spanning time: Structured memory for ultra-long agentic video reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.08271 , 2026b. Keliang Li, Yansong Li, Hongze Shen, Mengdi Liu, Hong Chang, and Shiguang Shan. Lenswalk: Agentic video understanding by planning how you see in videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.24558 , 2026c. Jingyang Lin, Jialian Wu, Jiang Liu, Ximeng Sun, Ze Wang, Xiaodong Yu, Jiebo Luo, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. Videoseek: Long-horizon video agent with tool-guided seeking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.20185 , 2026a. Jingyang Lin, Jialian Wu, Ximeng Sun, Ze Wang, Jiang Liu, Yusheng Su, Xiaodong Yu, Hao Chen, Jiebo Luo, Zicheng Liu, et al. Unleashing hour-scale video training for long video-language understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:17523–17552, 2026b. Lin Long, Yichen He, Wentao Ye, Yiyuan Pan, Yuan Lin, Hang Li, Junbo Zhao, and Wei Li. See-ing, listening, remembering, and reasoning: A multimodal agent with long-term memory. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2026, pp. 146197–146246, 2026. Karttikeya Mangalam, Raiymbek Akshulakov, and Jitendra Malik. Egoschema: A diagnostic bench-mark for very long-form video language understanding. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 36:46212–46244, 2023. OpenAI. GPT-5 system card, August 2025. URL https://openai.com/index/ gpt-5-system-card/ .10 OpenAI. GPT-5.5 system card, April 2026. URL https://deploymentsafety.openai. com/gpt-5-5 .Qwen Team. Qwen3.6-27B: Flagship-level coding in a 27B dense model, April 2026. URL https: //qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.6-27b .Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In International conference on ma-chine learning , pp. 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023. Aniket Rege, Arka Sadhu, Yuliang Li, Kejie Li, Ramya Korlakai Vinayak, Yuning Chai, Yong Jae Lee, and Hyo Jin Kim. Agentic very long video understanding. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 46575–46602, 2026. Xiaoqian Shen, Yunyang Xiong, Changsheng Zhao, Lemeng Wu, Jun Chen, Chenchen Zhu, Zechun Liu, Fanyi Xiao, Balakrishnan Varadarajan, Florian Bordes, et al. Longvu: Spatiotemporal adap-tive compression for long video-language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17434 , 2024. Tianyue Wang, Xuying Wu, Yuxiang Ma, Ruiming Liang, Jiaxuan Kang, Yanchao Hao, Zheng Wei, Leigang Qu, Haiyun Guo, and Jinqiao Wang. Routing before looking: Query-adaptive evidence acquisition for long-form video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.20805 , 2026a. Weihan Wang, Zehai He, Wenyi Hong, Yean Cheng, Xiaohan Zhang, Ji Qi, Ming Ding, Xiaotao Gu, Shiyu Huang, Bin Xu, et al. Lvbench: An extreme long video understanding benchmark. In 

2025 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 22958–22967. IEEE, 2025a. Ziyang Wang, Shoubin Yu, Elias Stengel-Eskin, Jaehong Yoon, Feng Cheng, Gedas Bertasius, and Mohit Bansal. Videotree: Adaptive tree-based video representation for llm reasoning on long videos. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 3272–3282. IEEE, 2025b. Ziyang Wang, Honglu Zhou, Shijie Wang, Junnan Li, Caiming Xiong, Silvio Savarese, Mohit Bansal, Michael S Ryoo, and Juan Carlos Niebles. Active video perception: Iterative evidence seeking for agentic long video understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 9088–9099, 2026b. Haoning Wu, Dongxu Li, Bei Chen, and Junnan Li. Longvideobench: A benchmark for long-context interleaved video-language understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:28828–28857, 2024. Rujie Wu, Xiaojian Ma, Hai Ci, Yue Fan, Yuxuan Wang, Haozhe Zhao, Qing Li, and Yizhou Wang. Longvitu: Instruction tuning for long-form video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05037 , 2025. Haiyang Yan, Hongyun Zhou, Peng Xu, Xiaoxue Feng, and Mengyi Liu. Symphony: A cognitively-inspired multi-agent system for long-video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.17307 ,2026a. Sikuan Yan, Sicheng Dong, Haotong Wang, Ercong Nie, Yilun Liu, Jinhe Bi, Yingjie Xu, Susanna Schwarzmann, Riccardo Trivisonno, Volker Tresp, et al. Pyravid: Hierarchical multimodal mem-ory for long-horizon video reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.17065 , 2026b. Sen Yang, Boqiang Duan, Jing Yang, Weihao Bo, Jie Liu, Boyuan Tong, Ze Feng, Wenkang Zhang, Jingdong Wang, and Hua Wu. Online video agent harness for long video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2609.12818 , 2026. Jinhui Ye, Zihan Wang, Haosen Sun, Keshigeyan Chandrasegaran, Zane Durante, Cristobal Eyza-guirre, Yonatan Bisk, Juan Carlos Niebles, Ehsan Adeli, Li Fei-Fei, et al. Re-thinking temporal search for long-form video understanding. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 8579–8591. IEEE, 2025. 11 Woongyeong Yeo, Kangsan Kim, Jaehong Yoon, and Sung Ju Hwang. Worldmm: Dynamic multi-modal memory agent for long video reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 25599–25609, 2026. Yufei Yin, Qianke Meng, Minghao Chen, Jiajun Ding, Zhenwei Shao, and Zhou Yu. Videoarm: Agentic reasoning over hierarchical memory for long-form video understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 24042–24051, 2026. Xiaoyi Zhang, Zhaoyang Jia, Zongyu Guo, Jiahao Li, Bin Li, Houqiang Li, and Yan Lu. Deep video discovery: Agentic search with tool use for long-form video understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:89863–89895, 2026. Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, et al. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 , 2025. Jialong Zuo, Yongtai Deng, Lingdong Kong, Jingkang Yang, Rui Jin, Yiwei Zhang, Nong Sang, Liang Pan, Ziwei Liu, and Changxin Gao. Videolucy: Deep memory backtracking for long video understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:25660–25691, 2026. 12 A ADDITIONAL RESULTS 

Additional Qualitative Results. Figure 3 shows two representative trajectories from coarse local-ization to fine-grained verification, illustrating progressive query-adaptive memory refinement. 

Case 1: Fine-grained temporal verification. 

The agents narrow the stairwell interval to 27–33 s, verify descent without door or window opening, and answer C. Overview Agent Skim Agent Focus Agent 

Reason / Plan: 

Use the explicit 00:27-00:33 query time to inspect the opening backstage stairwe /door seguence. Locator finds a plausible door event but no direct full match for climbing direction 

Observation: 

27.5 s: enters the stairwell area. 

32.5 s: reaches a closed black door. ASR does not establish movement airecton. 

Select: 

Select super_01; verify the exact action during 00:27-00:33 。

Tool Invocation: 

visual window: [0,600] s, 120 uniformly sampled frames in 3 ×2 grids. ASR window: [0,600] s. 

Update Memory: 

[New observation]: The target interval is in the backstage stairwell/door area. The black door remains closed; direction requires finer visual verification. 

Reason / Plan: 

Carefully inspect the complete six-second video sequence in its entirety to determine the direction of the observed movement and verify whether the door actually opens during this period. 

Observation: 

The man moves from the upper stair segment toward the lower landing and black door. 

Select: 

Select macro_0000; confirm the downward action and closed door. 

Tool Invocation: 

Window [30,40] s; full frames sampled across the broader context. 

Update Memory: 

[Refined Evidence]: He moves down the stairs. No window or door is visibly opened. 

Reason / Plan: 

Verify the action state-by-state and rule out a brief door-opening event. 

Observation: 

27.5 s: upper stair 

29.5 s: descending 

30.5 s: reaches landing 

32.5 s: closed ST-2 door 

Stop: 

Construct a composite memory and invoke the Answer Agent 

Tool Invocation: 

Window [27,33] s; approximately 1 FPS; complete frames. 

Update Memory: 

[Refined Evidence]: He descends from 27.5–30.5 s, then approaches the closed black door from 30.5–32.5 s. No door or window opening occurs. 

Final Verdict: C

Reason: 

1. Overview/Skim: The retrieved memory locates the stairwell sequence and indicates downward movement toward the black door. 2. Focus/New Observation: The man clearly descends the stairs, while the door remains closed and no window is opened. 

Answer Question 

Video & Question 

What does the man do from 00:27–00:33? A. He climbs the stairs B. He opens the window C. He walks down the stairs D. He opens the door 

User Query 

…

(Coarse) (to) (Fine) (Preconstructed Memory) 

(Query-Adaptive Memory) 

Case 2: Cross-branch evidence aggregation. 

The agents verify distinct performers across two piano-related branches roughly 25 minutes apart, aggregate the evidence, and answer D. Overview Agent Skim Agent Focus Agent 

Reason / Plan: 

Scan the full video for distinct contestants at a piano. Locator finds two plausible piano events in distant temporal regions, but repeated appearances remain unresolved. 

Observation: 

1935–1965 s: candidate #1 appears at a piano 

3555 s: candidate 2 appears at another piano. ASR does not establish contestant identity. 

Select: 

Select super_06 + super_10; verify distinct piano contestants in both candidate intervals. 

Tool Invocation: 

visual window: [0,3600] s, 120 uniformly sampled frames in 20 × 3×2 grids. ASR window: [0,3600] s. 

Update Memory: 

[New observation]: Two candidate piano performers occur in distant temporal regions. Whether they are distinct contestants requires finer visual verification. 

Reason / Plan: 

Carefully inspect both candidate branches to verify whether they show distinct contestants and confirm the instrument and performance context. 

Observation: 

The earlier branch shows one contestant performing at a piano. The later branch shows a visually distinct contestant performing at another piano. 

Select: 

Select macro_0019 + macro_0033; verify identities and piano-playing actions. 

Tool Invocation: 

Branch-local temporal windows; full frames sampled around each candidate with clear identity and instrument cues. 

Reason / Plan: 

Verify local playing evidence and confirm the two branches correspond to distinct contestants rather than repeated shots. 

Observation: 

Earlier branch: local keyboard-playing evidence is visible. 

Later branch: another contestant is clearly playing the piano. 

Stop: 

Merge both branch findings and invoke the Answer Agent. 

Tool Invocation: 

Fine-grained full frames sampled around both selected branch windows. 

Update Memory: 

[Refined Evidence]: Each branch contains one distinct contestant playing the piano; the earlier close-up is less clear but supported by neighboring frames. 

(Coarse) (to) (Fine) (Query-Adaptive Memory) 

Final Verdict: D

Reason: 

1. Overview/Skim: Retrieved memory preserves two distant piano branches and identifies two distinct contestants in separate regions. 2. Focus/New Observation: Fine-grained evidence verifies that both contestants are playing the piano, yielding a total count of two. 

Answer Question 

Update Memory: 

[Refined Evidence]: Both branches contain distinct contestants seated at pianos, with identity cues separating the two performers. 

Video & Question 

How many contestants can be seen playing the piano in the video? A。1 B. 4 C. 3 D. 2 

User Query 

…

(Preconstructed Memory) 

Figure 3: Two examples of coarse-to-fine query-adaptive memory refinement. 13 B EXPERIMENTAL AND INFERENCE DETAILS 

B.1 EVALUATION AND IMPLEMENTATION SETTINGS 

Closed- and open-source baseline evaluation. Values in the main table are obtained from the corresponding models’ technical reports or previously published benchmark results when avail-able; the remaining entries are obtained from our evaluations. GPT- and Qwen-based models are evaluated via their corresponding APIs across all four benchmarks. Direct baselines receive uni-formly sampled video frames. Under the maximum image-upload limits of the API gateways used in our experiments, GPT-family models receive 50 frames, Qwen3.7-Plus receives 196 frames, and Qwen3.6-27B receives 396 frames per video. For GPT-family models, the reasoning effort is set to high to enable extended reasoning, while Qwen-family models use thinking mode during direct inference. All inference runs use a temperature of 0.1. 

VideoTapestry inference setup and memory construction. Each Visual Observation Tool call uploads at most 50 images, respecting the GPT API gateway limit. Overview samples up to 120 frames and packs them into at most 20 six-frame grids, whereas Skim and Focus each use up to 50 individual frames from selected intervals. For fair comparison, the ASR Tool applies Whisper only to agent-selected audio windows rather than transcribing the full video. For GPT-family models, only the Answer Agent uses high reasoning effort, while all other calls use the default setting. For Qwen-based experiments, thinking is enabled only for planning, decision, and final answering, while all other calls use non-thinking mode. To isolate our query-time method from offline memory construction, all experiments use hierarchical video memories built following the MemDreamer procedure (Chen et al., 2026). For the MemDreamer baseline, we separately reproduce its retrieval pipeline. 

ASR Tool implementation details. The ASR Tool provides query-dependent access to spoken information within agent-selected temporal windows. For benchmarks without provided subtitles, including Video-MME (w/o subtitles), no subtitle text or full-video transcript is supplied to the model. After the Overview Agent identifies relevant temporal regions from the query and visual evidence, Whisper is applied only to the selected windows. At most three windows are accessed, each normalized to 600–1200 s within the video bounds, rather than transcribing the entire video. For benchmarks with provided subtitles, the same temporal-selection procedure is retained, but the ASR Tool directly retrieves subtitle text from the selected windows instead of invoking Whisper. In both cases, spoken information is exposed only on demand over agent-selected regions rather than provided globally throughout inference. 

Visual observation and grid-packing protocol. Direct baselines receive uniformly sampled in-dividual video frames without grid packing. We retain this setting because grid packing is part of VideoTapestry’s coarse observation mechanism rather than a generic preprocessing step; applying it to Direct would introduce an additional temporal-compression strategy beyond standard frame prompting. Within VideoTapestry, the Overview Agent samples up to 120 frames and packs them into at most 20 six-frame grids, providing broader temporal coverage while remaining within the per-call image limit described above. Once candidate regions are localized, the Skim and Focus Agents instead use individual frames from selected intervals to preserve finer visual detail for sub-sequent observation. 14 B.2 DETAILED INFERENCE PIPELINE 

Algorithms 1 and 2 jointly describe VideoTapestry’s inter-level coordination and intra-level refine-ment. Algorithm 1 summarizes the end-to-end hierarchical inference, including candidate propa-gation, instruction handoff, stopping, and composite memory assembly. Algorithm 2 specifies the per-layer Plan–Observe–Update–Decide procedure used across all four benchmarks, with one ob-servation/refinement batch and one decision per visited layer. Overview performs coarse visual observation with selected-window ASR, while Skim and Focus conduct progressively finer visual observation. 

Algorithm 1: Inference Pipeline of VideoTapestry Input: Video V , question q, options o, static hierarchy G and memory Mstatic , refinement agents 

{A S , AM , AG}, and Answer Agent Aans .

Output: Predicted answer by.1: Initialize CS with all SuperEvents, I0 ← ∅, Lq ← ∅, and trace Hq ← [ ] .2: for ℓ ∈ { S, M, G }, aligned with Overview, Skim, and Focus, do 

3: Load original candidate memory Mℓ ← M ℓ

> static

[Cℓ].4: if Mℓ = ∅, break .5: Run Algorithm 2 to obtain ( fMℓq , Sℓ, Iℓ, z ℓ).6: Lq ← L q ∪ { ℓ}; append the agent’s handoff instruction or stopping marker to Hq .7: if zℓ is true, break .8: Cℓ+1 ← S 

> v∈S ℓ

Children( v, G).9: end for 

10: Dq ← Serialize 



q, o, H q , Assemble 



{ fMℓq }ℓ∈L q

 

.11: Return by ← A ans (q, o, Dq ) without further retrieval or observation. 

Algorithm 2: Layer-Wise Observation and Memory Refinement Input: Level ℓ, video V , question q, options o, nonempty static candidate memory Mℓ, and upstream instruction Iℓ−1.

Output: Refined memory fMℓq , selected IDs Sℓ, downstream instruction Iℓ, and stop flag zℓ.1: Initialize local trajectory Hℓ ← [ ] and observations O ← ∅; g ← GlobalHeuristic( q, o ).2: p ← Plan ℓ(q, o, Mℓ, Iℓ−1, H ℓ); at S, include locator hints. 3: if ℓ = S then 

4: Merge planned ranges into one video-bounded window; fall back to the full video if invalid, and expand to at least min(600 s , duration( V )) .5: Ov ← VisualObserve using up to 120 frames packed into 20 six-frame grids. 6: pa ← PlanASR( q, o, MS , p, O v ); fall back to the visual window if no ASR ranges are proposed. 7: Normalize up to three ASR windows to 600–1200 s each within video bounds (use the full video if shorter than 600 s). 8: Oa ← ASRObserve( pa) using Whisper transcripts; O ← { Ov , O a}.9: Construct P from evidence-linked SuperEvents and their valid immediate temporal neighbors. 10: Build fMSq : retain original text in P and append available associated evidence; compress nodes outside P.11: else 

12: if p. observation needed or (ℓ = M and ¬g) then 

13: Intersect planned ranges with candidate intervals (fallback: candidate intervals); O ←

VisualObserve using up to 50 individual frames. 14: end if ; fMℓq ← Update ℓ(q, o, Iℓ−1, Mℓ, p, O ) for valid requested nodes. 15: end if ; record plans, observations, and updates in Hℓ.16: (Sℓ, Iℓ, z ℓ) ← Decide( q, o, Mℓ, fMℓq , Iℓ−1, H ℓ) once. 17: Force zℓ ← true at G; at S or M , force zℓ ← false for non-global questions. Validate selections and apply fallback IDs/instructions when continuing; stop if no valid descendants remain. 18: If stopping, clear Sℓ and Iℓ; return ( fMℓq , Sℓ, Iℓ, z ℓ).

15 B.3 PROMPTS USED IN VIDEO TAPESTRY 

We provide the core prompts used throughout our framework, covering the main stages of the overall pipeline and the key components involved in its execution, including planning, observation, memory updating, decision making, and answer generation. B.3.1 HIERARCHICAL OBSERVATION PLANNING 

Overview Agent Planning Prompt 

YOU ARE OVERVIEW AGENT. You are responsible for updating the current-level hierarchical video memory under a specific question. You can inspect visual frames through OBSERVATION TOOL and rewrite old memory text through UPDATE TOOL. Your goal is to produce concise, accurate, query-relevant dynamic memory for the current layer. Old memory text is only a static prebuilt summary. It is not visual verification and must not be treated as a substitute for observation. Only set observation_needed=false when the video file or visual frames are unavailable, or when this layer already has a prior visual observation in trajectory. For Overview/Super, observation_needed must be true for the first update attempt. Decide one bounded observation/update batch. Do not answer the question. Return strict JSON with keys: thought, observation_needed, observation_instruction, candidate_memory_ids, time_ranges, locator_time_hints_used. For Overview/Super, return exactly one contiguous visual observation time range inside observation_time_bounds. Center it on the evidence region you need to inspect; it may extend beyond an individual Super boundary. Choose a span of at least 600 seconds when the video duration permits; the program enforces the final minimum span. overview_locator_results, when present, are only global time-localization leads from entity/OCR/node search. Do not treat their text as visual facts or as support for an option. Use their timestamps only to choose a question-relevant continuous observation window, then require Observation Tool to verify the fact visually. When tool=multi_locator_compressed, candidate_windows are complete joint hypotheses containing one grounded match per atomic anchor. Prefer a complete, exact, temporally compact cluster; do not substitute an earlier partial look-alike merely because it ranks highly. Expand the chosen joint time_range into the required continuous observation span. If candidate_windows is empty or unresolved_anchors is nonempty, do not narrow the observation from partial Locator hits; instead use the complete Super memories to choose a broader window. Preserve plausible competing complete windows in locator_time_hints_used. The compressed result remains unverified localization, not answer evidence. Return locator_time_hints_used as a list of the temporal hints you actually adopted. Each item must explain only why a time window was selected; do not copy raw search output, query text, option language, or unverified factual claims. Return [] if none was used. candidate_memory_ids must come from supplied memory_id values. Current level is super. Respect the tool limits: at most 2observations, at most 2 updates, at most 4 total calls. 

16 Skim / Focus Planning Template 

YOU ARE {AGENT_NAME}. You are responsible for updating the current-level hierarchical video memory under a specific question. You can inspect visual frames through OBSERVATION TOOL and rewrite old memory text through UPDATE TOOL. Your goal is to produce concise, accurate, query-relevant dynamic memory for the current layer. Old memory text is only a static prebuilt summary. It is not visual verification and must not be treated as a substitute for observation. Only set observation_needed=false when the video file or visual frames are unavailable, or when this layer already has a prior visual observation in trajectory. For Overview/Super, observation_needed must be true for the first update attempt. Decide one bounded observation/update batch. Do not answer the question. Return strict JSON with keys: thought, observation_needed, observation_instruction, candidate_memory_ids, time_ranges, update_memory_ids. time_ranges must stay inside the time_range of the supplied old_memories. candidate_memory_ids and update_memory_ids must come from supplied memory_id values. Current level is {MEMORY_LEVEL}. Respect the tool limits: at most 2observations, at most 2 updates, at most 4 total calls. 

17 B.3.2 VISUAL OBSERVATION TOOL 

Visual Observation Tool Prompt 

YOU ARE OBSERVATION TOOL. You are being called by {AGENT_NAME} for the {MEMORY_LEVEL} layer. Inspect the provided visual frames and answer only the supplied observation_instruction. Do not update memory, infer an unstated question, or choose a multiple-choice answer. For observation_result: describe specific visible facts (people, actions, objects, on-screen text, timestamps shown). Include only facts that directly address observation_instruction. For uncertainty: list only facts you are unsure about. For relevance_to_question: one sentence summary of how the frames answer observation_instruction. If a fact is unclear, write it as uncertain instead of a confirmed fact. Return strict JSON with keys: observation_result, uncertainty, relevance_to_question. 

ASR Observation Tool Prompt 

YOU ARE THE OVERVIEW AGENT'S ASR OBSERVATION TOOL. You will receive exactly two inputs: 1. observation_instruction: the self-contained spoken-information request; 2. asr: the timestamped ASR transcript from the selected video window You do not receive the original question or answer options. Analyze only the supplied ASR to answer observation_instruction with objective facts. OUTPUT REQUIREMENTS 1. observation_result - Answer observation_instruction using only facts supported by the ASR. - When evidence is conclusive, state the underlying fact clearly. - When the evidence is incomplete, conflicting, or unclear, explicitly describe what cannot be determined. - Do not use outside knowledge and do not select a multiple-choice answer. 2. asr_evidence - Copy the most important supporting ASR lines exactly. - Preserve timestamps, text, punctuation, capitalization, line breaks , and transcription errors. - Do not paraphrase, translate, summarize, correct, merge, reorder, or rewrite. - Include only directly supporting lines, in chronological order. - Every character must come from the supplied asr. - Return an empty string when there is no reliable evidence. Return strict JSON with exactly these two fields: {"observation_result": "...", "asr_evidence": "..." }

18 B.3.3 MEMORY UPDATE TOOL 

SuperEvent Update Prompt 

YOU ARE UPDATE TOOL. You are being called by Overview Agent for the super layer. You receive question, options, previous_instruct, one shared update_instruction, observation_sources, and update_requests. Each long observation source appears exactly once in observation_sources. Every update request contains memory_id, old_memory_text, and source_refs. Resolve source_refs against observation_sources. Different Super memories may reference the same source so they can extract different, time-local or narrative-context facts without duplicating the source text in the request. Do not merge visual and ASR observations. Do not modify memory_id, time_range, level, or parent_id. SUPER LAYER RULES: - First set is_relevant to true or false. - If is_relevant is true: 1. Write only concise objective visual facts from referenced visual sources into visual_observation. If no visual source is referenced, return empty. 2. Write only concise objective spoken facts from referenced ASR sources into asr_observation. If no ASR source is referenced, return empty. 3. Keep the two modalities separate. Do not move or duplicate facts between them. 4. Do not repeat, summarize, rewrite, or quote old_memory_text. 5. Do not return or quote raw asr_evidence. The program assigns original ASR lines to memories from their timestamps after this call. 6. Keep irrelevant_summary empty. - If is_relevant is false: 1. Keep visual_observation and asr_observation empty. 2. Write a 1-2 sentence objective summary of the segment's topic and key content in irrelevant_summary. 3. Do not explain why the segment is irrelevant. Do not include a "[Visual observation]", "[ASR observation]", or "[ASR evidence]" heading. The program adds these headings when writing memory. STRICT PROHIBITION: Never write any option-tendency judgment in memory text. Never write phrases such as "consistent with B", "supports option A", "more likely X", "the correct answer is", or any equivalent statement that steers toward a specific answer choice. Only state objective facts supported by old memory or the supplied 

19 observation. The final answer agent will judge the options. Do not invent information that is not supported by old_memory_text or referenced observation sources. Preserve every supplied memory_id exactly. Return strict JSON exactly in this schema: {"updated_memories": {"memory_id": {"is_relevant": true, "visual_observation": "...", "asr_observation": "...", "irrelevant_summary": "" }}}

MacroEvent / Subgraph Update Prompt 

YOU ARE UPDATE TOOL. You are being called by {AGENT_NAME} for the {MEMORY_LEVEL} layer. Read the old memory text, question, options, and trajectory observations. Do not modify memory_id, time_range, level, or parent_id. {MEMORY_LEVEL_UPPERCASE} LAYER RULES: - RELEVANT memory: preserve specific facts - visible people, actions, objects, on-screen text, timestamps. Do not replace concrete details with vague phrases. - IRRELEVANT memory: write an extremely short summary (<=10 characters). STRICT PROHIBITION: Never write any option-tendency judgment in text. Never write phrases like 'consistent with B', 'supports option A', 'more likely X', or any statement that steers toward aspecific answer choice. Only state observed objective facts. The final answer agent will judge the options. Do not invent information not supported by old memory or observations .Return strict JSON exactly in this schema: {"updated_memories":{" memory_id":{"updated_text":"..."}}}. 

20 B.3.4 HIERARCHICAL DECISIONS AND INTER -A GENT HANDOFF 

Shared Decision Prompt 

YOU ARE {AGENT_NAME}. Decide whether the updated current-level dynamic memory is sufficient or whether to descend. Do not answer the question. {LEVEL_SPECIFIC_INSTRUCTION} Return strict JSON with keys: selected_child_memory_ids, stop_descending, next_instruct, reason, template_type. If stop_descending is true, selected_child_memory_ids must be [] and next_instruct must be null. If continuing, selected_child_memory_ids must be current-level memory ids supplied in updated_dynamic_memories. 

Hierarchical Decision Instructions 

If ℓ = L0 (Super), decide L0 → L1:

If continuing to Macro, generate next_instruct using one of these L0 ->L1 types: main_idea, temporal_order, identity, action_verification, spatial_relation, causal_result. The next_instruct must be one sentence that tells Skim Agent what type of Macro information to find. Return template_type as the selected type. Only global main-idea/title/summary questions may stop at Super. All other question types must continue to Macro. 

Else if ℓ = L1 (Macro), decide L1 → L2:

If continuing to Subgraph, generate a short instruction in the form: Found: [...]; still need to verify: [...]. For non-global detail questions, prefer continuing to Subgraph after at least one Macro observation; old Macro text alone is not enough to terminate. 

Else if ℓ = L2 (Subgraph), return STOP :

Focus is the final retrieval layer; stop_descending must be true. 

B.3.5 FINAL ANSWER AGENT 

Final Answer Agent System Prompt 

YOU ARE THE FINAL ANSWER AGENT. Based on the memory provided below, return strict JSON with keys: reasoning, answer. 

Final Answer Agent User Prompt 

Question: {RAW_QUESTION_WITH_OPTIONS} Retrieved video memory: {SERIALIZED_QUERY_ADAPTIVE_MEMORY} 

21 C MEMORY ABLATION PROTOCOL 

Shared evaluation setting. All configurations in Table 3(b) use the same 200-question subset of Video-MME Long, GPT-5.5, and the same preconstructed hierarchical memory. We distinguish the static-retrieval baseline from the controlled comparison of final memory components. 

Static retrieval baseline. Static Memory Only performs hierarchical retrieval without Visual, ASR, or Update calls. The Answer Agent receives the retrieved static SuperEvent, MacroEvent, and Subgraph contents together with the retrieval trace from that run; node contents are neither compressed nor rewritten. Its comparison with VideoTapestry therefore measures the combined effect of query-time observation and memory refinement rather than memory composition alone. 

Controlled final-memory ablations. For each question, VideoTapestry first completes its full query-time exploration. The resulting selected nodes, observations, refined contents, and explo-ration trace are then fixed, and three final memory representations are constructed: • Refined Super Only retains the refined Super-level scaffold while excluding MacroEvent and Subgraph contents. • Refined Paths Only retains refined MacroEvent and Subgraph contents along selected paths while excluding SuperEvents. • VideoTapestry combines the refined Super-level scaffold with the refined paths. The three variants use the same exploration trace and do not rerun retrieval, observation, or updating; only the memory contents supplied to the Answer Agent differ. Thus, their comparison isolates the contribution of the final serialized memory components under a fixed exploration result. 

D LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

VideoTapestry is evaluated with a fixed, preconstructed video hierarchy. Although query-time ob-servations can supplement missing details, retrieval remains constrained by the initial segmentation and parent–child structure. Incorrect event grouping or temporal boundaries may therefore hinder access to relevant evidence. Evaluating the framework with alternative memory constructors and allowing selective structural revision are promising directions. The framework also incurs offline memory-construction costs and additional query-time model and tool calls. The reported accuracy gains therefore do not establish a computational-efficiency ad-vantage. Future work could investigate budget-aware observation and refinement while separately accounting for offline and per-query costs. Finally, query-time refinement relies on model-generated interpretations of visual and transcript evidence, whose errors may propagate into refined memory and subsequent decisions. Our prompts encourage uncertainty reporting and evidence-supported updates, while Super-level memory records visual and transcript-derived observations separately. These safeguards do not guarantee correct interpretation or fully resolve conflicts between stored and newly observed information. Future work could track evidence provenance across levels and selectively re-verify uncertain or conflicting updates. 22