Title: TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.24289v1

Published Time: Tue, 22 Sep 2026 02:21:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework for LLM Agents 

# Ruimin Pei 

prm21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Poisson Lab, Huawei China 

# Yongkang Wu 

wuyongkang7@huawei.com 

Poisson Lab, Huawei China 

# Shangyi Zheng 

Poisson Lab, Huawei China 

# Yaqing Zhang 

Poisson Lab, Huawei China 

# Deyang Li 

Poisson Lab, Huawei China 

# Jianjun Tao 

Poisson Lab, Huawei China 

# Xinyu Zhang 

Poisson Lab, Huawei China 

# Xiang Zhang 

zhangxiang144@huawei.com 

Poisson Lab, Huawei China 

## Abstract 

As Large Language Model (LLM) agents are applied in continu-ously interactive environments, driving the evolution of their own capabilities becomes a core problem for achieving long-term au-tonomy. Currently, environmental knowledge is typically treated as an external fixed input rather than as part of the agent’s ongo-ing evolution. Reinforcement learning methods usually optimize policies through environmental interaction but tend to adapt only to fixed task distributions or single environments. This paper pro-poses TTSE (Two-Track Self-Evolution), a dual-track online self-evolution framework that separates evolving knowledge into FACT (environmental facts, whose reliability is continuously verified through interaction evidence) and TIP (task-conditioned imple-mentation procedures). From a decision-theoretic perspective, we decompose the agent’s excess risk into environment-representation regret and conditional-execution regret, characterize the conditions under which environment-conditioned policies strictly outperform condition-agnostic policies, and bound the downstream risk in terms of FACT identification error and cross-condition mismatch cost. In practice, TTSE’s ablation experiments on GDPevo validate the advantage of dual-track evolution. On the classic agent task benchmarks ALFWorld and ScienceWorld, TTSE further demon-strates superior task adaptation. Moreover, TTSE is broadly com-patible with existing skill self-evolution methods; combined with the Bayesian-Agent algorithm, a single-track ablation validates the dual-track advantage, substantially improving the aggregate score across the five major domains of SOPBench over three indepen-dent repetitions. Finally, on the real end-to-end task benchmark PinchBench, TTSE is integrated into a general agent framework via retrieval-based injection and stably outperforms the baseline across three independent runs. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Computing methodologies → Intelligent agents ; Knowledge representation and reasoning ; Natural language processing .

## Keywords 

LLM agents, self-evolution, experience memory, dual-track learning, procedural and declarative knowledge 

## 1 Introduction 

Large Language Model (LLM)-driven agents, through combining reasoning, tool use, and environmental interaction capabilities, have demonstrated powerful autonomous execution abilities in complex scenarios such as software development, web operations, scientific exploration, and embodied tasks [20, 27]. However, when these agents are deployed in open environments, they face challenges including continuous interaction, multi-task switching, and un-known state changes—static knowledge acquired during pretrain-ing alone is no longer sufficient to meet the demands of long-term autonomous operation. This challenge has spurred agent self-evolution research. How-ever, whether it is Reflexion’s reflections, Voyager’s skill library, ExpeL’s rules, or Bayesian-Agent’s posterior updates, the core ob-jective of existing work has consistently been to answer “what behavior should be adopted when facing a task”—the agent’s knowl-edge of “what the environment is like” is typically introduced in external static forms such as task descriptions and prompt contexts, rather than as an evolvable object that can be autonomously accu-mulated, verified, and revised (we survey related work in Section 2). We therefore call for a dual-track evolution mechanism. This gap leads to practical consequences: an agent that only op-timizes skills may learn experience that is effective under specific hidden conditions, producing erroneous transfer when environmen-tal conditions change. Therefore, a long-term autonomous agent needs to simultaneously address two complementary problems: learning how to act, and learning which regularities in the envi-ronment have stable validity under current interaction evidence. Neither is sufficient alone: optimizing only skills leads to behav-ior that depends on outdated assumptions, while accumulating only environmental knowledge cannot be translated into execution capability. Based on the above observations, this paper proposes TTSE (Two-Track Self-Evolution), a dual-track online self-evolution framework. 

> 1arXiv:2609.24289v1 [cs.LG] 21 Sep 2026 Ruimin Pei, Yongkang Wu, Shangyi Zheng, Yaqing Zhang, Deyang Li, Jianjun Tao, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiang Zhang

TTSE partitions agent experiential knowledge into two indepen-dent but co-evolving tracks: FACT (environmental facts) and TIP (task-conditioned implementation procedures). The FACT track maintains “what the environment is like” through interpretable natural language rules—whose reliability is continuously verified through interaction evidence and updated online via count-based evidence tracking; the TIP track maintains “how one should act”— whose effectiveness depends on environmental conditions. This paper makes the following contributions: (1) We propose TTSE, a two-track online self-evolution frame-work whose central novelty is a structural inductive bias: environmental facts (FACT, declarative) and conditional execution policies (TIP, procedural) are maintained as two rule lifecycles that can each be independently attributed, verified, retired, and contradiction-synthesized, rather than as a single undifferentiated rule store, and we validate this bias empirically under a unified induction budget. (2) We provide a decision-theoretic characterization of dual-track knowledge: we formulate agent decision making un-der latent environmental conditions and exactly decompose excess risk into FACT representation regret and TIP exe-cution regret. We further characterize when environment conditioning provides strict value and derive a dual-source risk bound connecting FACT identification errors and TIP execution quality to downstream performance; ablation experiments are conducted on GDPevo, with end-to-end evaluation on ALFWorld and ScienceWorld. (3) We demonstrate the transferability and practical compat-ibility of TTSE: it is compatible with existing skill self-evolution methods, and combined with the Bayesian-Agent algorithm [24] yields a dual-track posterior evolution frame-work with an aggregate improvement of +15.4pp across three repeated experiments on five major domains of SOP-Bench. All experiments are verified through three indepen-dent repeated runs. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Agent Self-Evolution and Skill Lifecycle Management 

Recent agent self-evolution research has progressively shifted from one-shot experiential reflection toward lifecycle management of reusable knowledge. Reflexion [13] generates feedback from failed trajectories via linguistic reflection; Voyager [19] abstracts expe-rience into a reusable skill library; ExpeL [31] pioneered extract-ing transferable rules from task trajectories for cross-task migra-tion. Skill-library lifecycle management has since become central: Ratchet [30] addresses “library drift” via outcome-driven retire-ment with convergence guarantees; SkillX [18] builds a three-level transferable skill base; WebXSkill [23] introduces executable param-eterized action programs; Bayesian-Agent [24] achieves posterior-guided skill evolution, a recent representative advance. However, these works focus on extracting and managing “execution skills,” while environmental knowledge is still assumed to be externally given. 

## 2.2 Reinforcement Learning and World Models 

Reinforcement learning (RL) and world models offer a paramet-ric learning route: in continual RL, Liu et al. [5] propose an on-line Follow-The-Leader world model that structurally avoids cata-strophic forgetting; Chua et al. [2] introduce fast/slow successor features whose progressive consolidation idea aligns with our evi-dence weighting. For world models, Richens et al. [10] prove that agents generalizing to multi-step goal-directed tasks must have learned a predictive environment model, with WALL-E [33], RWML [28], and EMPO 2 [6] advancing neurosymbolic, action-conditioned, and hybrid world models. These works mostly encode environmen-tal knowledge implicitly through parametric world models, which is complementary to our route of maintaining an interpretable en-vironmental representation via explicit natural-language rules with evidence verification. 

## 2.3 LLM Agent Memory Systems 

LLM agent memory systems provide a direct reference for our work. MemGPT [8] and Generative Agents [9] introduce hierarchi-cal memory architectures, but focus on individual agents’ memory retrieval rather than cross-task rule evolution; MemGen [29] en-ables agents to spontaneously evolve diverse human-like memory functions through a dynamic generative memory framework; AI-Agent School [4] adopts an experience-knowledge dual-memory architecture that directly supports the necessity of knowledge sep-aration; 𝜏 -Knowledge [12] systematically studies agent knowledge acquisition and utilization in open environments. Regarding the theoretical taxonomy of memory types, CoALA [16] distinguishes semantic from procedural memory at the conceptual level; MIRIX [22] realizes these as separate stores under coordinated manage-ment, but targets long-term personalized memory and information recall; Mem 𝑝 [3] focuses on the online learning of procedural mem-ory. These works either remain at the conceptual level or study a single memory type in isolation, and environmental knowledge is still treated as external input rather than a co-evolving object. Concurrent work begins to operationalize this separation: MSCE [17] partitions agent memory into grounded traces and reusable procedural policies versus declarative environmental cognition, crystallizing evidence-backed policies into callable skills. TTSE dif-fers by formalizing this split as an excess-risk decomposition and surfacing latent conditions from rule conflicts rather than inducing declarative knowledge by abstraction. To our knowledge, TTSE is the first work to implement environmental facts and conditional ex-ecution policies as two co-evolving online experience banks driven by task trajectories, equipped with failure attribution (Blame/Retire) and conflicting-condition synthesis (Contradict/Synthesize). 

## 2.4 Cognitive Science and Dual-System Memory 

The inspiration for our dual-track design comes from cognitive science. Anderson [1] distinguished declarative (“what the world is”) from procedural (“how to do things”) knowledge in ACT-R, and Squire [15] confirmed the biological basis of this separation—the two types of knowledge differ in brain region, learning rate, and retrieval mode. This transfer from human cognition to LLM-based agents is more than analogy: because large language models are trained on human-produced corpora, prior work reports that their 

> 2TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework for LLM Agents

internal representations share functional correspondences with human language and cognitive processing [11]. We therefore adopt the declarative–procedural distinction as a plausible architectural prior rather than an arbitrary design choice, without claiming that the models encode this distinction as an identifiable internal struc-ture. Yet this distinction has rarely been formally characterized in agent self-evolution; TTSE operationalizes it as two co-evolving online experience banks driven by interaction evidence, with a decision-theoretic characterization (Section 4). 

## 3 System Architecture 3.1 Dual-Track Knowledge Representation 

TTSE organizes knowledge extracted from interaction experience into two independent tracks: FACT (environmental facts) and TIP (task-conditioned implementation procedures). The motivation for this separation stems from the observation of essential differences in the cognitive properties of these two types of knowledge. FACT rules describe declarative properties of the environment— statements about “what the world is like,” such as “objects inside closed containers are not visible until the container is opened” or “the same object type can have multiple instances.” TIP rules describe conditional action strategies—procedural knowledge about “what behavior to adopt under what conditions,” such as “under condition: the task requires multiple objects of the same type, after placing the first one, continue searching for remaining objects.” 

3.1.1 Classification Mechanism. The classification of FACT versus TIP is achieved through a dual-judgment method in the prompt template, without requiring additional classifiers or labeled data. For each candidate rule induced by the LLM, two judgments are executed: 

• Subject Test: Is the subject of the rule the environment/ob-ject ( →FACT) or the agent itself ( →TIP)? 

• Necessity Test: Does violating the rule lead to direct task failure ( →FACT, hard constraint) or only reduced efficiency (→TIP, soft heuristic)? When uncertain, the default classification is TIP. The key role of this conservative strategy is to prevent FACT contamination—the erroneous labeling of speculative generalizations that are only valid under specific conditions as universal truths, thereby eroding the credibility of the FACT library. For example, the rule “washing cloth objects with a sinkbasin may fail” describes a conditional heuristic rather than an environmental law, and must be classified as TIP. Each TIP must follow the explicit conditional format under <condition>: <action> , making its dependent hidden context visible at the representation level, thereby laying the foundation for subsequent contradiction detection and condition synthesis. 

## 3.2 Online Evolution Pipeline 

The core of TTSE’s self-evolution capability is a chunk-based in-cremental loop. Training tasks are divided into 𝑁 equally sized chunks, and each chunk completion triggers one round of rule li-brary updates. Unlike the ExpeL offline pipeline (which collects all trajectories before performing one-shot induction), TTSE’s online loop enables the rule library to continuously self-correct as train-ing progresses—erroneous rules discovered in early chunks can be eliminated by the blame-retire mechanism in later chunks, and conflicting rules can be synthesized into conditioned knowledge via the contradict-synthesize mechanism. Each chunk (chunk ≥ 1) evolution consists of four strictly ordered phases: Phase 1: Blame. For all failed task execution trajectories in the current chunk, analyze one by one whether the failure cause can be attributed to any rule injected during training. If a rule directly misled the agent’s decision (e.g., suggested an operation ineffective in the current environment), that rule is marked as “culpable.” Phase 2: Retire. Attributed rules are removed from the active library and transferred to the retired pool, with appended audit records (retirement reason, chunk index, timestamp). Rules in the retired pool no longer participate in subsequent task injection, but their text and retirement reasons are preserved, providing evidence for the contradiction synthesis in the next phase. Phase 3: Contradict/Synthesize. When the retired pool has accu-mulated sufficient entries, the LLM is asked to scan the pool for con-tradictory rule pairs—rules that give opposite advice about the same environmental property. Such contradictions are strong signals of hidden environmental conditions: each rule’s advice may be correct under the conditions from which it was induced, but the explicit characterization of applicable conditions is missing. The core oper-ation of Contradict/Synthesize is to explicitly surface the missing conditions: a pair of contradictory rules is synthesized into a single TIP with explicit conditions ( under <condition>: <action> ), en-abling the agent to select the correct behavioral branch according to current conditions in subsequent tasks. Phase 4: Induce. Based on the complete experience (success and failure trajectories) of the current chunk, the LLM performs incre-mental updates to the existing rule library. Induction proceeds in two stages: (1) compare stage—pair and contrast success and fail-ure trajectories for the same task, distilling improvements from “why success succeeded and why failure failed”; (2) success-only 

stage—induce reusable general strategies from all successful tra-jectories. The incremental mode ( keep_bank=True ) ensures that existing knowledge is not cleared; the LLM performs local opti-mization on the current rule library through four operations: EDIT (refine), AGREE (confirm), REMOVE (eliminate), ADD (insert). Cold Start (Chunk 0). The first chunk injects no rules—the agent runs with zero knowledge and establishes the initial rule set through pure induction from the first batch of experience. This ensures that the discovery of initial rules is not influenced by existing biases. 

## 4 Theoretical Framework: Error Decomposition for Environment Representation and Conditional Execution 4.1 Problem Setting 

We formulate agent self-evolution as decision making under latent environmental conditions. Let 𝑜 ∈ O denote the observable task context, including the task instruction and the interaction history available before a decision is made. Let 𝑧 ∈ Z denote a latent environmental condition that affects which action is appropriate. For example, visually similar tasks may require different operations 

> 3Ruimin Pei, Yongkang Wu, Shangyi Zheng, Yaqing Zhang, Deyang Li, Jianjun Tao, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiang Zhang

Figure 1: The TTSE dual-track self-evolution framework. Knowledge is separated into FACT (environmental facts) and TIP (task-conditioned implementation procedures) channels, each with independent numbering, rendering, and evidence-tracking mechanisms. The online evolution pipeline cyclically executes Blame → Retire → Contradict/Synthesize → Induce across multiple training chunks. 

because of differences in object states, tool semantics, API behavior, or domain-specific constraints. The agent selects an action 𝑎 ∈ A and incurs a bounded loss 

ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ) ∈ [ 0, 1].

Lower loss corresponds to more successful task execution. TTSE decomposes experiential knowledge into two functional components. The FACT channel constructs an environment repre-sentation 

𝐹 : O → S ,

where 𝐹 (𝑜 ) summarizes decision-relevant properties inferred from the interaction context. The TIP channel implements a conditional policy 

𝜋 : O × S → Δ(A) ,

where Δ(A) denotes the set of probability distributions over actions. Together, a FACT–TIP pair (𝐹, 𝜋 ) induces the expected risk 

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) = E(𝑜,𝑧 )∼D E𝑎 ∼𝜋 (· | 𝑜,𝐹 (𝑜 ) ) [ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 )] . (1) This abstraction does not assume that natural-language FACTs recover the complete physical state of the environment. Instead, 

𝐹 (𝑜 ) represents the decision-relevant environmental information preserved by the FACT bank and exposed to the execution policy. 

## 4.2 Representation–Execution Error Decomposition 

For a fixed environment representation 𝐹 , define the best condi-tional policy available in the TIP policy class Π as 

𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

∈ arg min   

> 𝜋 ∈Π

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ). (2) We also define an oracle policy that directly observes the true environmental condition: 

𝑅 ★ = inf  

> 𝜌 ∈Πoracle

E(𝑜,𝑧 )∼D E𝑎 ∼𝜌 (· | 𝑜,𝑧 ) [ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 )] . (3) The oracle class is assumed to contain policies that can ignore 𝑧 

and use only 𝐹 (𝑜 ); therefore, access to the true condition cannot increase the minimum achievable risk. 

Proposition 1 (Representation–execution decomposition). For any FACT representation 𝐹 and TIP policy 𝜋 , the excess risk relative to the environment-aware oracle can be decomposed exactly as 

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) − 𝑅 ★ = 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) − 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

)

| {z }  

> ETIP (𝐹,𝜋 )

+ 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

) − 𝑅 ★

| {z }  

> EFACT (𝐹 )

. (4) 

> 4TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework for LLM Agents

Here, ETIP is the execution regret remaining under the current environment representation, whereas EFACT is the representation regret that cannot be eliminated by improving execution alone. Both terms are non-negative. Proposition 1 identifies two conceptually distinct sources of failure. Even with a sufficiently informative FACT representation, the agent may fail because it cannot reliably select or execute the appropriate conditional action. Conversely, even an effective TIP policy cannot fully compensate for an environment representation that omits decision-relevant distinctions. 

## 4.3 Value of Environment-Conditioned Policies 

To characterize when environmental knowledge provides strict value, consider two policy classes. An environment-agnostic policy uses only the observable task context: 

Πagn = {𝜌 : O → Δ(A)} ,

whereas an environment-conditioned policy may additionally de-pend on the true condition: 

Πcond = {𝜌 : O × Z → Δ(A)} .

Their optimal risks are 

𝑅 ★ 

> agn

= inf  

> 𝜌 ∈Πagn

E [ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 )] , (5) and 

𝑅 ★ 

> cond

= inf  

> 𝜌 ∈Πcond

E [ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 )] . (6) Define the value of environmental conditioning as 

𝐻 = 𝑅 ★ 

> agn

− 𝑅 ★

> cond

. (7) 

Proposition 2 (Value of environmental conditioning). For any task distribution and bounded loss, 

𝐻 ≥ 0. (8) Moreover, 𝐻 > 0 whenever, with positive probability, the same observable context is compatible with multiple environmental con-ditions that require different optimal actions with a positive loss margin. The result follows because every environment-agnostic policy is a special case of an environment-conditioned policy. The inequality is strict when no single action distribution can be optimal across all conditions consistent with the same observable context. Proposition 2 clarifies that FACT is not expected to provide equal value in every task domain. When environments are effectively ho-mogeneous, or when one action is optimal under all conditions, environmental conditioning provides little additional benefit. Its value increases when superficially similar situations require con-flicting actions. 

Corollary 1 (Binary conflict environment). Suppose two environ-mental conditions are equally likely and require mutually incom-patible unique actions, while the observable context alone does not distinguish the conditions. Under zero–one loss, any environment-agnostic policy has success probability at most 1 /2. A system that correctly identifies the condition and executes the corresponding conditional action can achieve success probability 1. Contradict/Synthesize implements this form of conditioning at the representation level: conflicting unconditional rules are con-verted into an explicit condition–action TIP rather than being treated as a single universally valid instruction. 

## 4.4 A Dual-Source Excess-Risk Bound 

We next connect FACT identification quality to downstream deci-sion risk. Assume that Z is finite and that the FACT representation outputs a predicted condition 

b𝑧 = 𝐹 (𝑜 ) ∈ Z .

Let 

𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 ) ∈ arg min  

> 𝑎 ∈ A

ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ) (9) denote an oracle action for condition 𝑧 . Define the FACT identifica-tion error 

𝜂 𝐹 = Pr [𝐹 (𝑜 ) ≠ 𝑧 ] , (10) and the maximum cost of applying an action optimized for an incorrect condition as 

Δmax = sup 

> 𝑜,𝑧,𝑧 ′

ℓ  𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 ′) − ℓ  𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 )  

> +

. (11) Because ℓ ∈ [ 0, 1], we have 0 ≤ Δmax ≤ 1. 

Proposition 3 (Dual-source excess-risk bound). Assume that the TIP policy class can realize the plug-in conditional policy 

𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝐹 (𝑜 )) . Then 

EFACT (𝐹 ) ≤ 𝜂 𝐹 Δmax , (12) and consequently 

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) − 𝑅 ★ ≤ E TIP (𝐹, 𝜋 ) + 𝜂 𝐹 Δmax . (13) This bound gives two complementary routes to performance improvement. TIP evolution reduces execution regret under the current representation. FACT evolution reduces the probability of selecting a behavioral branch corresponding to the wrong environ-mental condition. The impact of a FACT error is amplified when cross-condition action mismatch is costly, as quantified by Δmax .

## 4.5 Implications for TTSE 

The theoretical quantities above should be interpreted as func-tional targets rather than as directly observed optimization objec-tives. FACT induction and evidence tracking aim to preserve more decision-relevant environmental distinctions, thereby reducing rep-resentation regret. Conditional TIP induction and rule rendering aim to reduce execution regret under the inferred context. Blame and Retire provide targeted credit assignment for misleading rules, while Contradict/Synthesize converts conflicting unconditional ad-vice into explicitly conditioned behavior. Accordingly, TTSE’s algorithmic mechanisms can be viewed as practical approximations for separately managing the two error terms in Eq. (4). The theory does not require either channel to improve monotonically after every interaction, nor does it claim that the implemented update procedure necessarily converges to the oracle risk. 

> 5Ruimin Pei, Yongkang Wu, Shangyi Zheng, Yaqing Zhang, Deyang Li, Jianjun Tao, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiang Zhang

Table 1: The four complementary research questions and the corresponding benchmarks. 

Evidence level Benchmark Research question Mechanism GDPevo Dual- vs. single-track ablation Transferability SOPBench Ablation and compatibil-ity with other mecha-nisms End-to-end ALFWorld / Science-World Task adaptation on clas-sic benchmarks Deployment PinchBench Harness compatibility and practical utility 

Scope of the analysis. Our results do not claim that every uni-fied memory system is less expressive than a dual-track system. A sufficiently expressive single-bank representation could, in princi-ple, encode both environmental properties and conditional policies. The theoretical role of TTSE is instead to make two sources of decision error explicit and separately manageable. FACT/TIP sepa-ration therefore serves as a modular inductive bias for knowledge induction, rendering, verification, and credit assignment, rather than as a universal expressivity advantage. Full proofs are provided in Appendix A. 

## 5 Experiments 

This paper evaluates TTSE through four complementary research questions, with the corresponding experiments developed across Section 5 (Table 1). First, GDPevo examines dual-track com-plementarity via FACT-only, TIP-only, and FACT+TIP ablations (Mechanism). Second, SOPBench compares unified single-track and dual-track representations under the same Bayesian lifecycle management, examining whether the dual-track advantage trans-fers to an external skill-management mechanism (Transferability). Third, ALFWorld and ScienceWorld evaluate the end-to-end task-adaptation capability of the complete TTSE system (End-to-end effectiveness). Fourth, PinchBench does not re-isolate the marginal contribution of FACT/TIP classification; instead, it examines whether TTSE can be integrated non-invasively into a real agent runtime and retain its performance gains in open, multi-step tool-calling environments (Deployment). Section 5.1 presents ALFWorld, ScienceWorld, and GDPevo; Sec-tions 5.2 and 5.3 report the SOPBench fusion and the PinchBench deployment experiments. 

## 5.1 Three Classic Benchmarks: ALFWorld, ScienceWorld, and GDPevo 

5.1.1 ALFWorld. ALFWorld [14] is an embodied agent benchmark containing 134 valid unseen tasks spanning 6 types. The agent must use natural language instructions to navigate rooms, manipu-late objects, and apply state changes (cleaning, heating, cooling). We randomly sample 500 tasks from the full training set as the training set, with 5 chunks (chunk_ratio=0.2), 50 shard parallelism, and a maximum of 50 steps per task. Evaluation uses the rule li-brary from the final chunk. Two LLMs each run independently 

Table 2: ALFWorld success rate (SR) and step count com-parison. All values are three-run means. GraSP and the Re-Act/ExpeL results reproduced therein are from the original GraSP paper [25]; SkillOpt [26] and SkillX [18] are our re-productions under the same setting. TTSE achieves the best result on both backbones, significantly outperforming skill-optimization baselines such as SkillOpt and SkillX. Method DS-V3.2 GLM-5 

SR ↑ Steps ↓ SR ↑ Steps ↓

ReAct [27] 69.4 19.3 64.6 14.6 ExpeL [31] 76.1 17.4 72.6 11.4 GraSP [25] 83.6 14.8 94.9 10.3 SkillOpt [26] 68.7 13.3 62.7 15.1 SkillX [18] 56.5 11.2 88.3 9.2 TTSE (Ours) 97.8 10.0 98.51 9.2 Table 3: ScienceWorld six-run comparison. TTSE achieves a substantial improvement over the corresponding baseline. 

MACRO Reward Native Success Baseline R1 0.7335 55.47% Baseline R2 0.7100 52.45% Baseline R3 0.7177 51.32% Baseline Mean ±𝜎 0.7204 ±0.010 53.08% ±1.74 TTSE R0 0.8634 77.36% TTSE R1 0.8366 69.43% TTSE R2 0.8602 73.58% TTSE Mean ±𝜎 0.8534 ±0.012 73.46% ±3.2 

Δ vs Baseline +0.1330 +20.38pp three times: DeepSeek-V3.2 and GLM-5 (both in thinking mode). The step count metric is pure action steps (excluding think steps); three-run means are averaged. This setup matches the baselines’ evaluation protocol—same backbones, same unseen-task evaluation split, same 50-step budget, and no privileged information—and the rule library used for evaluation is the one retained after the final training chunk, so the comparison reflects deployment-realistic experience accumulation rather than a per-task oracle. Comparison with Existing Methods: Under the same backbone and evaluation split, TTSE outper-forms previously reported results: 97.8% on DeepSeek-V3.2 vs. GraSP’s 83.6% (+14.2pp), and 98.51% on GLM-5 vs. GraSP’s 94.9% (+3.6pp). We attribute this efficiency advantage to the dual-channel rendering mechanism: FACT rules provide environmental priors that reduce exploratory trial-and-error, while TIP rules provide verified operational procedures that reduce ineffective actions. 

5.1.2 ScienceWorld. ScienceWorld [21] is a textual science exper-iment simulation containing 30 task types. Tasks span chemistry experiments, biological classification, physical measurement, and genetics problems. The agent must navigate simulated science labo-ratories, use instruments, and conduct experiments. We train online using GLM-5 (thinking): 30 shards, max 50 steps, 5 chunks. After training, three independent evaluations are conducted. Three-Run Results: 

> 6TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework for LLM Agents

Table 4: GDPevo four-condition ablation (three runs). All con-ditions are trained online except base (zero-shot); each con-dition’s bank composition follows its name. full (FACT+TIP) mean 0.2616, 2.8 × over baseline. Dual-track beats single-track tips (+2.4pp) and facts (+7.0pp).                     

> Condition Mean R1 R2 R3 full (FACT+TIP) 0.2616 0.2849 0.2528 0.2471 tips (TIP only) 0.2380 0.2312 0.2513 0.2314 facts (FACT only) 0.1918 0.1546 0.2045 0.2163 base (zero-shot) 0.0947 0.0765 0.0840 0.1235

5.1.3 GDPevo Ablation. GDPevo [32] is a multi-domain enterprise operations benchmark covering 12 task groups across CRM, ERP, finance, and HR domains. We conduct 4-condition ablation ex-periments on GDPevo using GLM-5 (thinking mode), with each condition independently repeated three times. The baseline is the classic ReAct framework; the experimental groups differ only in the dual-track prompt wording. The full group explicitly instructs the extraction of both tracks into separate banks; the tips and 

facts groups explicitly require extraction of only tips or facts in the induction prompt. The ablation results provide evidence for the dual-track design. 

full (FACT+TIP) achieves a three-run mean of 0.2616, an improve-ment of 0.1669 (approximately 2.8 ×) over the zero-shot baseline of 0.0947. Single-track variants underperform dual-track: TIP-only achieves 0.2380 ( −2.4pp vs. full) and FACT-only only 0.1918 ( −7.0pp vs. full). We note that the gap between full and TIP-only is not accompanied by a formal significance test; the difference is consis-tent in direction across runs but its magnitude should be read as ablation evidence rather than a statistically certified margin. These results are consistent with Proposition 1 rather than constituting a direct verification of its latent quantities. FACT-only leaves sub-stantial execution regret because environmental descriptions alone do not specify a reliable conditional procedure. TIP-only performs better but lacks an independently maintained representation for distinguishing environment-dependent behavioral branches. The full system can address both sources of error. GDPevo’s enterprise operation domain provides complemen-tary validation to ALFWorld and ScienceWorld: the former tests TTSE’s dual-track mechanism under controlled ablation, while the latter two test the complete system’s end-to-end task adaptation. Together, the experiments show that TTSE outperforms previously reported results on ALFWorld and substantially improves over the corresponding baseline on ScienceWorld. 

## 5.2 SOPBench Fusion Experiment 

To demonstrate the generality of the dual-track paradigm, we in-tegrate TTSE with the Bayesian-Agent posterior-driven skill man-agement system [24]. In this fusion, Bayesian posteriors Beta (𝛼, 𝛽 )

replace TTSE’s heuristic +1/ −1 counting for rule lifecycle decisions (Retire/Stable/Exploring), while TTSE’s FACT/TIP representation and LLM-driven induction provide the knowledge acquisition mech-anism. The knowledge base starts completely empty—all rules are induced from scratch by DeepSeek v4-flash from failure trajectories, with no hand-written seed rules. At each step, the top-8 FACT and top-8 TIP rules by posterior success probability are rendered into the agent context. 

Table 5: SOPBench ablation (three-run means). Bayesian posteriors improve accuracy; FACT/TIP classification adds +3.0pp overall.                                    

> Domain Tasks Base Single Dual Δ
> aircraft_insp. 112 95.8% 97.6% 98.8% +1.2pp customer_svc. 156 97.2% 97.9% 98.9% +1.0pp dangerous_goods 274 77.1% 94.6% 94.0% −0.6pp referral_abuse 200 97.8% 97.7% 99.5% +1.8pp warehouse_insp. 150 26.7% 66.9% 81.3% +14.4pp Overall (micro) 892 79.15% 91.59% 94.58% +2.99pp

Figure 2: SOPBench success rate by domain (three-run means). Dual-track (FACT+TIP) outperforms the single-track ablation overall and in four of five domains, with the largest gain in warehouse_package_inspection. Table 6: Rules quality: Single vs. Dual. Dual-track rules are 18% shorter (137 vs. 167 chars/rule), saving context tokens.                              

> Domain Single-track Dual-track Rules Chars/rule Rules Chars/rule aircraft_insp. 11 191 5140 customer_svc. 10 167 9145 dangerous_goods 52 158 59 128 referral_abuse 15 155 4139 warehouse_insp. 37 166 69 134 Average 25 167 29 137

We evaluate on SOPBench [7], selecting 5 representative do-mains with large sample sizes (892 tasks × 3 repetitions = 2,676 total evaluations). To isolate the contribution of FACT/TIP classi-fication, we conduct a single-track ablation: all rules are induced into a single unified bank without FACT/TIP type distinction, and the induction prompt imposes no special requirements on rule categories—the LLM freely induces rules in a unified “rule” format, with only Bayesian posterior updates governing rule quality. Both single-track and dual-track systems achieve substantial im-provements over the baseline (Figure 2). The dual-track FACT/TIP classification contributes an additional +3.0pp overall. Moreover, beyond this accuracy advantage, a deeper analysis of the induced rules reveals more fundamental structural differences (Table 6). Three structural findings emerge from Table 6. (1) Dual-track rules are 18% shorter (137 vs. 167 chars/rule)—each injection brings immediate token savings. (2) warehouse_package_inspection is the most compelling case: with a very low baseline, our dual-track achieves an upward leap in improvement. (3) Shorter rules together yield approximately a 17% reduction in rule context tokens per 

> 7Ruimin Pei, Yongkang Wu, Shangyi Zheng, Yaqing Zhang, Deyang Li, Jianjun Tao, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiang Zhang

Table 7: PinchBench three independent runs (means over all 147 task scores). TTSE beats the baseline in every single run (+3.83pp on average); the run-to-run range drops from 3.33pp to 1.61pp, i.e., experience accumulation makes the agent’s performance more stable and less reliant on single-run luck.                      

> Config r0 r1 r2 mean range baseline 0.7259 0.7592 0.7466 0.7439 3.33pp TTSE 0.7718 0.7879 0.7868 0.7822 1.61pp
> per-run Δ+4.59pp +2.87pp +4.02pp +3.83pp halved

task injection. Overall, the dual-track representation is effective in aggregate, with its advantage most pronounced in domains where environmental rules are complex and FACT/TIP complementarity is strong. Statistical testing further supports the reliability of the overall dual-track advantage: paired bootstrap across 892 tasks (10,000 resamples) shows that the +2.99pp overall gain is statistically sig-nificant (permutation test 𝑝 < 10 −4, 95% CI [+2.34pp, +3.65pp]), with warehouse_package_inspection contributing 78% of the total gain (+14.44pp). Even excluding warehouse, dual-track retains a +0.67pp positive advantage ( 𝑝 = 0.011). 

## 5.3 PinchBench Deployment 

It is important to clarify that the PinchBench experiment is not 

designed to re-isolate the marginal contribution of FACT/TIP clas-sification. That question is already answered by the GDPevo single-track ablation (Section 5.1) and the SOPBench unified-single-track control (Section 5.2). Instead, this experiment asks a different ques-tion: whether TTSE can be integrated non-invasively into a real agent harness and retain its end-to-end benefit in open, multi-step tool-calling task streams. The first four benchmarks (ALFWorld, ScienceWorld, GDPevo, SOPBench) all evaluate TTSE in relatively controlled task spaces; to address the deployment question, we use PinchBench as a fifth experiment. Unlike controlled sandbox tasks, PinchBench contains 147 real end-to-end tasks spanning writ-ing, coding, research, CSV analysis, meeting minutes, log analysis, and browser automation; the agent must complete multi-step tool calls and file production, with an independent judge scoring output quality on a continuous 0–1 scale. We integrate the TTSE dual-track module on top of a general-purpose agent framework (OpenClaw). Unlike the prompt-context whole-bank injection used earlier for fixed-category task sets, here we adopt semantic retrieval injection : all bank experience is encoded with all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (384-dim), and each new task performs a cosine-similarity top-𝐾 retrieval over its prompt (top-10 FACT and top-10 TIP), injecting only the experience most relevant to that task so that irrelevant entries do not dilute attention. FACTs are written into ENVIRONMENT.md (anchoring “what the target looks like”) and TIPs into TIPS.md (providing “how to do it”). We use the bare agent ( TTSE_ENABLE=0 , no experience injected) as the baseline and run both configurations independently three times: It is worth emphasizing that TTSE outperforms the baseline in 

each of the three independent runs (+4.59pp, +2.87pp, +4.02pp), a consistent and stable direction of gain. In one run, the number of strictly perfect (1.0) tasks rose from 65/147 to 70/147—the gain is reflected not only in the continuous-score mean but also in pushing “almost-done” tasks across the perfection line. The TIP track does not merely guide basic tools: it fully inter-faces with the framework’s AgentSkill system. Each skill is a self-describing unit (with a SKILL.md manifest) that the agent lazy-loads via the read tool only when the skill description matches the cur-rent task. The bank’s TIPs already include entries that explicitly guide the agent on when and how to invoke a particular skill (e.g., “when a task requires installing a capability from a registry: use the clawhub skill”; “when a task requires GitHub CLI operations: use the github skill”). This shows that TTSE follows the industry-standard skill protocol and that the TIP track already drives the agent to discover and invoke skills, interfacing seamlessly with the existing skill ecosystem. 

## 6 Conclusion 

This paper presents TTSE (Two-Track Self-Evolution), an online dual-track self-evolution framework for LLM agents. Its core in-sight is that interaction-derived knowledge naturally falls into two categories—declarative environmental facts (FACT) and task-conditioned procedures (TIP)—and conflating them causes knowl-edge conflicts and spurious rules. Through independent FACT and TIP channels, each with dedicated induction, rendering, deduplica-tion, and evidence tracking, TTSE lets environmental knowledge and execution skills co-evolve. Across five benchmarks, TTSE ob-tains stable positive results on the overall or primary evaluation metrics, though the magnitude of the dual-track benefit varies by domain and is more pronounced in tasks with higher environmental-condition heterogeneity. The theoretical analysis does not treat FACT/TIP separation as a universal expressivity advantage over all possible unified mem-ories. Instead, it shows that environment representation and con-ditional execution correspond to distinct sources of decision error. FACT/TIP separation should therefore be understood as a modu-lar inductive bias—not as a claim of universal expressive power— and TTSE makes these two error sources separately manageable through dedicated induction, rendering, evidence tracking, and credit-assignment mechanisms. More fundamentally, the experiments provide broad support for dual-track FACT/TIP separation as a transferable, modular in-ductive bias: it works across different evidence-tracking mecha-nisms (heuristic counting and Bayesian posteriors), different LLM backbones (GLM-5, DeepSeek-V3.2, DeepSeek v4-flash), and di-verse task domains (enterprise API auditing, embodied interac-tion, scientific reasoning, SOP execution, open-ended tool-calling). The GDPevo ablation provides ablation evidence for dual-track over single-track variants (the Full-vs-TIP-only gap is not formally significance-tested); ALFWorld exceeds previously reported results under the same backbone; ScienceWorld improves substantially over its baseline; the SOPBench fusion confirms compatibility with posterior-driven lifecycle management; and PinchBench shows non-invasive integration into a real agent harness with retained end-to-end gains. Taken together, the declarative/procedural separation of knowledge is a broadly effective design principle across the evalu-ated settings. This has direct design implications: mainstream agent frameworks typically maintain only a procedural knowledge base 

> 8

TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework for LLM Agents 

(skill.md ), lacking an independent, co-evolving environmental-knowledge representation ( environment.md ). Treating environ-mental facts as first-class knowledge that co-evolves with skills is a key architectural decision for long-term agent autonomy. 

## 7 Limitations and Future Work 

Although TTSE demonstrates robust gains across multiple bench-marks, this work has several limitations. First, TTSE’s rule bank starts from a blank cold start, so the agent’s behavior in the initial chunk relies entirely on the LLM’s zero-shot ability; in domains where the LLM itself is insufficient, a promising direction is to in-troduce a small number of high-quality human examples as seed rules or to use a stronger LLM for initial bootstrapping. Second, rule induction in this paper relies entirely on the LLM, and the LLM may produce spurious or overly specialized rules on low-quality trajectories; the current system filters these post-hoc via evidence counting and the Subject/Necessity Test dual classification, but the induction stage itself lacks a structured verification mechanism— coupling the induction process with execution verification (e.g., requiring a new rule to pass on held-out verification tasks before entering the bank) may further improve rule quality, though as base-model capabilities continue to improve this issue is expected to be naturally mitigated, and non-LLM rule-distillation mechanisms can also interface seamlessly with our dual-track mechanism. 

## 8 Ethical Considerations 

This work does not involve human subjects or personal data. All experiments use publicly available benchmarks (ALFWorld, Sci-enceWorld, GDPevo, SOPBench, and PinchBench) with synthetic or non-sensitive agent trajectories; no real user data is collected, stored, or released. A beneficial side effect of TTSE is that it makes an agent’s ac-cumulated knowledge more explicit and auditable. Both tracks are maintained as human-readable natural-language rules whose reli-ability is tracked through interaction-derived evidence counts, so the basis for any induced behavior can be inspected and revoked (retired) rather than being opaque in latent parameters; this trans-parency is a deliberate design choice that facilitates oversight. As with any method that improves autonomous agent capability, dual-use risk exists—more capable agents could in principle be redirected toward harmful tasks—and we encourage deploying TTSE-based agents under the same access controls, action logging, and human-in-the-loop review that govern autonomous agents generally. We report all results as means over three independent repetitions to avoid cherry-picking favorable runs, and we disclose domain-level cases in which dual-track underperforms the single-track ab-lation (e.g., dangerous_goods) rather than reporting only aggregate gains. The repeated-rollout evaluation protocol incurs additional LLM inference cost; we bound this through fixed trajectory bud-gets and, where applicable, batched induction that amortizes one reflection call over multiple tasks. 

## References 

[1] John R. Anderson. 1983. The Architecture of Cognition . Harvard University Press. [2] Raymond Chua, Doina Precup, and Blake Richards. 2026. Balancing Plasticity and Stability with Fast and Slow Successor Features. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .[3] Runnan Fang, Yuan Liang, Xiaobin Wang, Jialong Wu, Shuofei Qiao, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Huajun Chen, and Ningyu Zhang. 2026. Mem 𝑝 : Exploring Agent Procedural Memory. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) . arXiv:2508.06433. [4] Sheng Jin, Haoming Wang, Zhiqi Gao, Yongbo Yang, Chunjia Bao, and Chengliang Wang. 2025. Evolution in Simulation: AI-Agent School with Dual Memory for High-Fidelity Educational Dynamics. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 . 5843–5857. [5] Zichen Liu, Guoji Fu, Chao Du, Wee Sun Lee, and Min Lin. 2025. Continual Reinforcement Learning by Planning with Online World Models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , Vol. 267. PMLR. Spotlight. [6] Zeyuan Liu, Jeonghye Kim, Xufang Luo, Dongsheng Li, and Yuqing Yang. 2026. Exploratory Memory-Augmented LLM Agent via Hybrid On- and Off-Policy Optimization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) . Poster. arXiv:2602.23008 [7] Subhrangshu Nandi, Arghya Datta, Nikhil Vichare, Rohith Nama, Udita Patel, Indranil Bhattacharya, Shivam Asija, Arushi Gupta, Giuseppe Carenini, Jing Xu, Shayan Ray, Huzefa Raja, Aaron Chan, Francesco Carbone, Esther Xu Fei, Gaoyuan Du, Zuhaib Akhtar, Prince Grover, Sreyoshi Bhaduri, Weian Chen, Wei Zhang, and Ming Xiong. 2026. SOP-Bench: Complex Industrial SOPs for Evaluating LLM Agents. In KDD .[8] Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2023. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as Operating Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 (2023). [9] Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2023. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST) .[10] Jonathan Richens, Tom Everitt, and David Abel. 2025. General Agents Need World Models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , Vol. 267. PMLR, 51659–51687. [11] Martin Schrimpf, Idan A. Blank, Greta Tuckute, Carina Kauf, Eghbal A. Hosseini, et al. 2021. The Neural Architecture of Language: Integrative Modeling Converges on Predictive Processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, 45 (2021), e2105646118. [12] Quan Shi, Alexandra Zytek, Pedram Razavi, Karthik Narasimhan, and Victor Barres. 2026. 𝜏 -Knowledge: Evaluating Conversational Agents over Unstructured Knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04370 (2026). [13] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .[14] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew J. Hausknecht. 2021. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Embodied Environments for Interactive Learning. In Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .[15] Larry R. Squire. 1992. Memory and the Hippocampus: A Synthesis from Findings with Rats, Monkeys, and Humans. Psychological Review 99, 2 (1992), 195–231. [16] Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths. 2023. Cognitive Architectures for Language Agents. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) (2023). arXiv:2309.02427. [17] Bo Tang, Yang Zhang, Guomian Zhuang, Wenqiang Wei, Gaoyang Zheng, Lin-dong Xie, Yanchao Tan, Feiyu Xiong, Qingyu Yang, Edward Chung, and Zhiyu Li. 2026. From Memory to Skills: Evidence-Grounded Co-Evolution Governance for Long-Horizon LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.16621 (2026). [18] Chenxi Wang, Zhuoyun Yu, Xin Xie, Wuguannan Yao, Runnan Fang, Shuofei Qiao, Kexin Cao, Guozhou Zheng, Xiang Qi, Peng Zhang, and Shumin Deng. 2026. SkillX: Automatically Constructing Skill Knowledge Bases for Agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.04804 (2026). [19] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2024. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) (2024). [20] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei Wei, and Jirong Wen. 2024. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents. Frontiers of Computer Science 18, 6 (2024), 186345. [21] Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. 2022. ScienceWorld: Is your Agent Smarter than a 5th Grader?. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .11279–11298. [22] Yu Wang and Xi Chen. 2025. MIRIX: Multi-Agent Memory System for LLM-Based Agents. (2025). arXiv:2507.07957. [23] Zhaoyang Wang, Qianhui Wu, Xuchao Zhang, Chaoyun Zhang, Wenlin Yao, Fazle Elahi Faisal, Baolin Peng, Si Qin, Suman Nath, Qingwei Lin, Chetan Bansal, Dongmei Zhang, Saravan Rajmohan, Jianfeng Gao, and Huaxiu Yao. 2026. WebXSkill: Skill Learning for Autonomous Web Agents. arXiv preprint 

9Ruimin Pei, Yongkang Wu, Shangyi Zheng, Yaqing Zhang, Deyang Li, Jianjun Tao, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiang Zhang 

arXiv:2604.13318 (2026). [24] Xiaojun Wu, Cehao Yang, Honghao Liu, Xueyuan Lin, Wenjie Zhang, Zhichao Shi, Xuhui Jiang, Chengjin Xu, Jia Li, and Jian Guo. 2026. Bayesian-Agent: Posterior-Guided Skill Evolution for LLM Agent Harnesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.08348 

(2026). [25] Tianle Xia, Lingxiang Hu, Yiding Sun, Ming Xu, Lan Xu, Siying Wang, Wei Xu, and Jie Jiang. 2026. GraSP: Graph-Structured Skill Compositions for LLM Agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.17870 (2026). [26] Yifan Yang, Ziyang Gong, Weiquan Huang, Qihao Yang, Ziwei Zhou, Zisu Huang, Yan Li, Xuemei Gao, Qi Dai, Bei Liu, Kai Qiu, Yuqing Yang, Dongdong Chen, Xue Yang, and Chong Luo. 2026. SkillOpt: Executive Strategy for Self-Evolving Agent Skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.23904 (2026). [27] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .[28] Xiao Yu, Baolin Peng, Ruize Xu, Yelong Shen, Pengcheng He, Suman Nath, Nikhil Singh, Jiangfeng Gao, and Zhou Yu. 2026. Reinforcement World Model Learning for LLM-based Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05842 (2026). [29] Guibin Zhang, Muxin Fu, and Shuicheng Yan. 2025. MemGen: Weaving Genera-tive Latent Memory for Self-Evolving Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24704 

(2025). [30] Xing Zhang, Yanwei Cui, Guanghui Wang, Ziyuan Li, Wei Qiu, Bing Zhu, and Peiyang He. 2026. Ratchet: A Minimal Hygiene Recipe for Self-Evolving LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.22148 (2026). [31] Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. 2024. ExpeL: LLM Agents Are Experiential Learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 38. 19632–19642. [32] Leijun Zhou, Zhihao Liu, Xiang Qu, Chenxu Liu, Yifei Liu, Yanke Yu, Jingzhe Xu, Xuejun Wu, Buyue Qian, Xi Chen, Yaowei Zheng, and Junhao Hu. 2026. GDPevo: Evaluating Agent Self-Evolution on Real Business Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.03764 (2026). [33] Siyu Zhou, Tianyi Zhou, Yijun Yang, Guodong Long, Deheng Ye, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi Zhang. 2025. WALL-E: World Alignment by NeuroSymbolic Learning improves World Model-based LLM Agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .

## A Complete Proofs for the Representation–Execution Framework 

This appendix provides complete proofs for the theoretical results presented in Section 4. The analysis formalizes the distinction be-tween environment representation and conditional execution. It is not intended as a convergence proof for the particular LLM-based update operators used by TTSE. 

## A.1 Notation and Basic Definitions 

Let (𝑜, 𝑧 ) ∼ D , where 𝑜 ∈ O is the observable task context and 

𝑧 ∈ Z is a latent environmental condition. Let A be the action space and 

ℓ : O × Z × A → [ 0, 1]

be a bounded loss function. A FACT representation is a mapping 

𝐹 : O → S .

A TIP policy is a conditional action distribution 

𝜋 (· | 𝑜, 𝐹 (𝑜 )) ∈ Δ(A) .

Their expected risk is 

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) = E(𝑜,𝑧 )∼D E𝑎 ∼𝜋 (· | 𝑜,𝐹 (𝑜 ) ) [ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 )] . (14) Let Π denote the admissible TIP policy class. For a fixed repre-sentation 𝐹 , define 

𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

∈ arg min   

> 𝜋 ∈Π

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ). (15) Let Πoracle denote a policy class whose policies can condition directly on (𝑜, 𝑧 ). We assume that it contains all policies obtainable from Π and 𝐹 , because an oracle policy may ignore 𝑧 and output 

𝜌 (· | 𝑜, 𝑧 ) = 𝜋 (· | 𝑜, 𝐹 (𝑜 )) .

The oracle risk is 

𝑅 ★ = inf  

> 𝜌 ∈Πoracle

E(𝑜,𝑧 ) E𝑎 ∼𝜌 (· | 𝑜,𝑧 ) [ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 )] . (16) 

## A.2 Proof of Proposition 1 

Proposition 1. For any FACT representation 𝐹 and TIP policy 𝜋 ,

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) − 𝑅 ★ = ETIP (𝐹, 𝜋 ) + E FACT (𝐹 ), (17) where 

ETIP (𝐹, 𝜋 ) = 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) − 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

) (18) and 

EFACT (𝐹 ) = 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

) − 𝑅 ★. (19) Both terms are non-negative. 

Proof. Adding and subtracting 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

) gives 

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) − 𝑅 ★ = 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) − 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

)+ 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

) − 𝑅 ★, (20) which proves the equality. Because 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

minimizes 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) over Π,

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) ≥ 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

) (21) for every 𝜋 ∈ Π. Hence 

ETIP (𝐹, 𝜋 ) ≥ 0. (22) Furthermore, the oracle policy class can reproduce the behavior of 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

by ignoring 𝑧 and using 𝐹 (𝑜 ). Therefore 

𝑅 ★ ≤ 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

), (23) which implies 

EFACT (𝐹 ) ≥ 0. (24) 

□

Interpretation. The decomposition is an exact identity rather than an approximation. The first term measures whether the agent effectively acts on the information currently represented by FACT. The second measures whether that representation retains enough information to match an environment-aware oracle. In particular, improving execution alone cannot eliminate EFACT ,because min  

> 𝜋 ∈Π

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) − 𝑅 ★ = EFACT (𝐹 ). (25) Likewise, an informative representation is insufficient if the de-ployed TIP policy has nonzero execution regret. 

## A.3 Proof of Proposition 2 

We define an environment-agnostic policy as a mapping 

𝜌 0 : O → Δ(A) 

and an environment-conditioned policy as 

𝜌 𝑧 : O × Z → Δ(A) .

Their optimal risks are 

𝑅 ★ 

> agn

= inf 

> 𝜌 0

E(𝑜,𝑧 ) E𝑎 ∼𝜌 0 (· | 𝑜 ) [ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 )] , (26) 

10 TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework for LLM Agents 

and 

𝑅 ★ 

> cond

= inf 

> 𝜌 𝑧

E(𝑜,𝑧 ) E𝑎 ∼𝜌 𝑧 (· | 𝑜,𝑧 ) [ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 )] . (27) Define 

𝐻 = 𝑅 ★ 

> agn

− 𝑅 ★

> cond

. (28) 

Proposition 2. For any distribution D and bounded loss ℓ,

𝐻 ≥ 0. (29) The inequality is strict when, on a set of observable contexts with positive probability, multiple possible environmental conditions require different optimal actions with positive loss margins. 

Proof of non-negativity. Every environment-agnostic policy can be represented as an environment-conditioned policy that ignores 

𝑧 :

𝜌 𝑧 (· | 𝑜, 𝑧 ) = 𝜌 0 (· | 𝑜 ). (30) Consequently, 

Πagn ⊆ Πcond , (31) and optimization over the larger class cannot produce a higher minimum: 

𝑅 ★ 

> cond

≤ 𝑅 ★

> agn

. (32) Therefore 𝐻 ≥ 0. □

A sufficient condition for strictness. For a fixed observable context 

𝑜 , define 

𝐿 𝑜,𝑧 (𝑞 ) = E𝑎 ∼𝑞 [ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 )] , 𝑞 ∈ Δ(A) . (33) Conditioned on 𝑜 , the minimum risk of an environment-agnostic policy is 

𝑟 agn (𝑜 ) = min 

> 𝑞 ∈Δ( A )

∑︁ 𝑧 

𝑝 (𝑧 | 𝑜 )𝐿 𝑜,𝑧 (𝑞 ), (34) whereas the minimum risk of an environment-conditioned policy is 

𝑟 cond (𝑜 ) =∑︁ 

> 𝑧

𝑝 (𝑧 | 𝑜 ) min   

> 𝑞 𝑧 ∈Δ( A )

𝐿 𝑜,𝑧 (𝑞 𝑧 ). (35) For any fixed 𝑞 ,

𝐿 𝑜,𝑧 (𝑞 ) ≥ min 

> 𝑞 𝑧

𝐿 𝑜,𝑧 (𝑞 𝑧 ). (36) Multiplying by 𝑝 (𝑧 | 𝑜 ), summing over 𝑧 , and minimizing the left-hand side over 𝑞 gives 

𝑟 agn (𝑜 ) ≥ 𝑟 cond (𝑜 ). (37) Suppose that there is a measurable set B ⊆ O with Pr (𝑜 ∈ B) >

0 such that, for every 𝑜 ∈ B , there exist two conditions 𝑧 1, 𝑧 2 with 

𝑝 (𝑧 1 | 𝑜 ) > 0, 𝑝 (𝑧 2 | 𝑜 ) > 0, (38) and different unique optimal actions 

𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 1) ≠ 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 2). (39) Assume additionally that choosing a non-optimal action incurs a strictly positive loss margin. That is, for 𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2}, there exists 

𝛾 𝑖 (𝑜 ) > 0 such that 

ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧 𝑖 , 𝑎 ) − ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧 𝑖 , 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 𝑖 )) ≥ 𝛾 𝑖 (𝑜 ) (40) for every 𝑎 ≠ 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 𝑖 ).No single action distribution can place probability one on both distinct optimal actions. Therefore every common action distribu-tion 𝑞 incurs strictly positive excess loss in at least one of the two conditions. Because both conditions have positive probability, 

𝑟 agn (𝑜 ) > 𝑟 cond (𝑜 ) (41) for all 𝑜 ∈ B . Taking the expectation over 𝑜 yields 

𝑅 ★ 

> agn

> 𝑅 ★

> cond

, (42) and hence 𝐻 > 0. □

## A.4 Proof of Corollary 1 

Corollary 1. Suppose 

𝑧 ∈ { 0, 1}, Pr (𝑧 = 0) = Pr (𝑧 = 1) = 12 , (43) and the observable context contains no information about 𝑧 . Let 

𝑎 ★ 

> 0

≠ 𝑎 ★ 

> 1

be the unique successful actions in the two conditions. No action succeeds in both conditions. Then every environment-agnostic policy has success probability at most 1 /2. 

Proof. Consider first a deterministic policy. It must choose the same action under both conditions. If it chooses 𝑎 ★ 

> 0

, it succeeds only when 𝑧 = 0; if it chooses 𝑎 ★ 

> 1

, it succeeds only when 𝑧 = 1. Any other action fails in both. Therefore its maximum success probability is 1/2. For a randomized policy, let 𝑟 be the probability assigned to 𝑎 ★

> 0

and 𝑠 the probability assigned to 𝑎 ★ 

> 1

. Since 𝑎 ★ 

> 0

≠ 𝑎 ★ 

> 1

,

𝑟 + 𝑠 ≤ 1. (44) The success probability is Pr (success ) = 12𝑟 + 12𝑠 ≤ 12 . (45) If the condition is correctly identified and the policy selects 𝑎 ★ 

> 𝑧

,it succeeds under both conditions and achieves success probability one. □

Relation to Contradict/Synthesize. The corollary does not imply that a specific contradiction-detection algorithm is theoretically necessary. Rather, it identifies a necessary representational capa-bility: the policy class must be able to express different actions under different environmental conditions. Contradict/Synthesize is TTSE’s concrete mechanism for transforming conflicting uncondi-tional rules into such condition–action mappings. 

## A.5 Proof of Proposition 3 

Assume that Z is finite and that the FACT representation predicts a condition 

𝐹 (𝑜 ) ∈ Z . (46) Let 

𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 ) ∈ arg min  

> 𝑎 ∈ A

ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ) (47) be an oracle action. Define 

𝜂 𝐹 = Pr [𝐹 (𝑜 ) ≠ 𝑧 ] (48) and 

Δmax = sup 

> 𝑜,𝑧,𝑧 ′

ℓ  𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 ′) − ℓ  𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 )  

> +

. (49) 

> 11 Ruimin Pei, Yongkang Wu, Shangyi Zheng, Yaqing Zhang, Deyang Li, Jianjun Tao, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiang Zhang

Because the loss lies in [0, 1],0 ≤ Δmax ≤ 1. (50) 

Proposition 3. If the admissible TIP policy class contains the plug-in policy 

𝜋 plug  

> 𝐹

(𝑜 ) = 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝐹 (𝑜 )) , (51) then 

EFACT (𝐹 ) ≤ 𝜂 𝐹 Δmax . (52) Consequently, 

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) − 𝑅 ★ ≤ E TIP (𝐹, 𝜋 ) + 𝜂 𝐹 Δmax . (53) 

Proof. Because 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

is optimal among all policies in Π, and the plug-in policy is assumed to belong to Π,

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

) ≤ 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 plug  

> 𝐹

). (54) Under the oracle policy, the minimum risk is 

𝑅 ★ = E(𝑜,𝑧 )

ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 ))  . (55) The risk of the plug-in policy is 

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 plug  

> 𝐹

) = E(𝑜,𝑧 )

ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝐹 (𝑜 )))  . (56) Therefore, 

EFACT (𝐹 ) = 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

) − 𝑅 ★

≤E ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝐹 (𝑜 ))) − ℓ (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ★ (𝑜, 𝑧 ))  . (57) When 𝐹 (𝑜 ) = 𝑧 , the difference inside the expectation is zero. When 𝐹 (𝑜 ) ≠ 𝑧 , the difference is at most Δmax . Thus 

EFACT (𝐹 ) ≤ Pr (𝐹 (𝑜 ) ≠ 𝑧 )Δmax 

= 𝜂 𝐹 Δmax . (58) Combining Eq. (58) with the exact decomposition in Proposition 1 yields 

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ) − 𝑅 ★ = ETIP (𝐹, 𝜋 ) + E FACT (𝐹 )≤ E TIP (𝐹, 𝜋 ) + 𝜂 𝐹 Δmax . (59) 

□

## A.6 Interpretation of the Single-Track Restrictions 

The preceding analysis does not assert that all unified rule banks are fundamentally incapable of representing environment-conditioned policies. Instead, the experimental FACT-only and TIP-only con-ditions can be interpreted as restrictions on which component of Eq. (17) can be directly improved. 

FACT-only restriction. A FACT-only system may improve its en-vironment representation 𝐹 , but continues to use a fixed or weakly adapted execution policy 𝜋 base . Its excess risk is 

𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 base ) − 𝑅 ★ = 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 base ) − 𝑅 (𝐹, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹

)

| {z }

> remaining execution regret

+ E FACT (𝐹 ).

(60) Improving environmental knowledge does not, by itself, guarantee that the corresponding behavior can be selected and executed. 

TIP-only restriction. A TIP-only system without an indepen-dently maintained environment representation can be modeled using a fixed coarse representation 𝐹 0. Even when its execution policy approaches 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹 0

, its minimum achievable excess risk is 

𝑅 (𝐹 0, 𝜋 ★ 

> 𝐹 0

) − 𝑅 ★ = EFACT (𝐹 0). (61) This residual is strictly positive when the representation fails to distinguish conditions that require different actions. 

Dual-track learning. TTSE maintains distinct update pathways for 𝐹 and 𝜋 . Its mechanisms are therefore capable of addressing both 

EFACT and ETIP . However, the present analysis does not claim mono-tonic improvement or oracle convergence for the implemented LLM induction procedure. 

## A.7 Scope and Limitations of the Formal Analysis 

The formal model establishes three claims: (1) environment representation and conditional execution in-duce two exactly decomposable sources of excess risk; (2) environment conditioning provides strict decision value when latent conditions require incompatible optimal ac-tions; and (3) downstream excess risk is controlled jointly by execution regret and condition-identification error. These results characterize the functional motivation for TTSE. They do not prove that natural-language FACTs are statistically consistent estimators of latent conditions, that the Blame/Retire operator always performs correct credit assignment, or that the rule bank converges under arbitrary task streams. A sufficiently expressive unified memory could, in principle, en-code both environmental facts and conditional procedures. TTSE should therefore be understood as introducing a modular inductive bias: separating the two types of knowledge makes their induc-tion, rendering, verification, and credit assignment independently controllable. 

> 12

TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework for LLM Agents 

## B Parameter Settings and Reproducibility 

This appendix documents all hyperparameters, configurations, and prompt templates to ensure full reproducibility of the experimental results reported in the main paper. 

## B.1 Agent Configuration 

File : configs/agent/expel.yaml 

Table 8: Agent hyperparameter reference. Runtime overrides use Hydra syntax (e.g., agent.llm=DeepSeek-V3.2 ). 

Parameter Default Description 

llm deepseek-v4-flash Model name; overridden at runtime 

max_reflection_depth 3 Max reflection depth (compare chain length) 

max_num_rules 20 Rule bank capacity; trig-gers aggressive REMOVE when full 

truncate_strategy null Trajectory truncation (null = no truncation) 

fewshot_strategy task_similarity Few-shot selection strat-egy 

success_critique_num 8 Number of success trajec-tories for all_success cri-tique 

rule_categories both Rule categories at eval: both / facts / tips 

rule_injection all Injection mode: all / topk 

num_relevant_rules 5 Top-K per channel when 

rule_injection=topk top_n_facts null Max FACTs per injection (null = all) 

top_n_tips null Max TIPs per injection (null = all) 

online_chunk_ratio 0.2 Fraction of training set per chunk (0.2 = 5 chunks) 

online_num_shards 1 Intra-chunk parallel workers 

blame_threshold 1 Blame count before retire-ment (1 = retire on first blame) 

Retrieval Configuration: 

• embedder_path : a l l - m p n e t - b a se - v2 (sentence-transformers) 

• embedder_type : huggingface 

• retriever_type : knn 

• reranker : none 

• max_fewshot_tokens : auto 

## B.2 Benchmark Configurations 

B.2.1 ALFWorld. File : configs/benchmark/alfworld.yaml 

• max_steps : 50 (identical for training and main evaluation) 

• num_fewshots : 2 

• eval_configs.k_folds : 2, seed 42 

• split : eval_out_of_distribution (valid unseen) 

• env.type : AlfredTWEnv (text-only TextWorld) 

• env.task_types : [1,2,3,4,5,6] (pick & place / examine / clean / heat / cool / pick two) 

B.2.2 ScienceWorld. File : configs/benchmark/scienceworld.y aml 

• max_steps : 50 

• num_fewshots : 2 

• eval_configs.k_folds : 2 

• Note : Score is a 0–100 integer (not 0–1); success = 

env.isCompleted 

B.2.3 GDPevo. File : configs/benchmark/gdpevo.yaml 

• max_steps : 16 (API exploration tasks require fewer steps) 

• num_fewshots : 1 

• score_threshold : 0.6 

• gdpevo_root : ${GDPEVO_DATA_ROOT} (environment vari-able) 

## B.3 Environment Variables 

Table 9: Required and recommended environment variables. 

Variable Description 

DEEPSEEK_API_KEY (Required) API key for the DeepSeek API 

DEEPSEEK_API_BASE (Required) DeepSeek endpoint base URL, e.g. ht tps://api.deepseek.com ALFWORLD_DATA TextWorld game data directory (ALFWorld only) 

GDPEVO_DATA_ROOT GDPevo data root (GDPevo only) 

SOP_DATA_ROOT SOP-Bench data directory (SOP-Bench only) 

TTSE_ROOT Project root (auto-detected) 

TTSE_OUTPUT_DIR Output directory (default: ./output )

HF_ENDPOINT HuggingFace mirror (set to 

https://hf-mirror.com in China) 

PYTHONNOUSERSITE (Strongly recommended) Set to 1 to avoid pydan-tic/langchain conflicts 

OMP_NUM_THREADS (Recommended for sharding) Set to 1 to prevent thread explosion 

## B.4 Training and Evaluation Commands 

B.4.1 Online Training. online_train.py uses Hydra configura-tion overrides:           

> python -u -s online_train.py \ benchmark=<name> # alfworld / scienceworld / gdpevo benchmark.task_file=<path> # Training task JSON file benchmark.max_steps=<N> # Override default max_steps agent.llm=<model> # Override default LLM agent.online_chunk_ratio=<f> # Override chunk ratio agent.online_num_shards=<N> # Override intra-chunk parallelism run_name=<str> # Run name (log/checkpoint path) testing= false # Must be false (else only few tasks) resume= false # Per-task resume online_resume= true # Chunk-level resume: skip c{N}.pkl

B.4.2 Evaluation (Sharded). eval.py evaluates a trained rule bank over the held-out split, sharded across workers for parallelism:   

> SHARD_ID=$s NUM_SHARDS=$NS python -u -s eval .py \ benchmark=<name> benchmark.task_file=<path> \ load_run_name=extracted_insights/<bank_name> \ run_name=<eval_run_name> agent.llm=<model> \ agent.fewshot_strategy=task_similarity \ benchmark.eval_configs.k_folds=2 testing= false resume= false

B.4.3 SOP-Bench Fusion. run_sop.py runs the SOP-Bench base-line or fusion mode over a domain:      

> python run_sop.py \ --mode baseline|fusion # Mode --domain <name> # SOP-Bench domain name --out <output_dir> # Output directory --limit <N> # Task limit (default 50) --bank <bank.json> # Bank file (fusion mode only)

B.4.4 Single-Track Ablation. run_sop_single.py runs the single-track (unified-rule) ablation:   

> python run_sop_single.py \ --domain <name> # SOP-Bench domain name --out <output_dir> # e.g., ./output/single_track

13 Ruimin Pei, Yongkang Wu, Shangyi Zheng, Yaqing Zhang, Deyang Li, Jianjun Tao, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiang Zhang 

--run <N> # Run ID (0/1/2) --limit <N> # Task limit (0 = all) 

Single-track ablation configuration: 

• Model: deepseek-v4-flash , API: https://api.deepse ek.com 

• Temperature: 0.3, Max Tokens: 4096, Max Turns: 10 

• Rule type: unified "rule" (no FACT/TIP distinction), injec-tion cap max_rules=16 

• Belief update: Bayesian posterior (SkillBelief alpha/beta) + targeted credit assignment ( record_task_outcome_targ eted )

• 5 domains × 3 runs = 15 independent experiments 

B.4.5 Dual-Track Fusion V2. run_sop_fusion_v2.py runs the dual-track FACT/TIP fusion V2 pipeline: 

python run_sop_fusion_v2.py \ --domain <name> # SOP-Bench domain name --out <output_dir> # e.g., ./output/fusion_v2 --run <N> # Run ID --limit <N> # Task limit (0 = all) 

Uses the same DeepSeek API endpoint and the same generation configuration as single-track (temperature 0.3, max tokens 4096, max turns 10), so the two ablations differ only in track structure (unified rule vs. FACT/TIP) under a unified induction budget; FACT and TIP are each injected top-8 (16 rules total). 

## B.5 Key Prompt Templates 

B.5.1 FACT/TIP Classification and Operation Template. Source :

ttse/prompts/templates/human.py — FORMAT_RULES_OPERATI ON_TEMPLATE 

<TYPE> <OPERATION> <RULE NUMBER>: <RULE> Each rule is either a FACT or a TIP, with DIFFERENT grammatical forms. A FACT is a DECLARATIVE statement that describes a property of the world --the environment, objects, user, or task. It states how things ARE, with NO action instruction and NO condition on what you should do. Its subject is the world/things (not you). A FACT must NOT contain "you should", "must do ", or "in order to" -- if it does, it is a TIP. A TIP is a PROCEDURAL rule about what YOU should do, written in the conditional form "under <condition>: <action>". Its subject is you (the agent). A TIP must ALWAYS carry an explicit "under <condition: ...>:" prefix; a TIP without a condition is malformed. IMPORTANT - how to classify, use BOTH tests: - SUBJECT TEST: what is the rule about? If it describes a property of the WORLD/objects/user, it is a FACT. If it instructs what YOU do, it is a TIP. - NECESSITY TEST: what happens if you go against it? If it makes the task FAIL, it is a FACT (hard constraint). If it only makes you slower, it is a TIP. When unsure, default to [TIP]. Operations: AGREE / REMOVE / EDIT / ADD Do at most 4 operations; each existing rule at most 1 operation. 

Key design points: 

• FACT must be a statement directly verifiable by environ-mental observation; its subject is the world/objects 

• TIP must be written in under <condition>: <action> 

conditional form 

• Dual-test classification (Subject Test + Necessity Test); de-fault to TIP when uncertain 

• Intra-channel independent numbering: FACTS and TIPS each start from 1 

• Maximum 4 operations, each existing rule at most 1 opera-tion 

B.5.2 BLAME Template. Source : ttse/prompts/templates/hum an.py — ONLINE_BLAME_TEMPLATE 

You are diagnosing why an agent FAILED a task. Below is (1) the task, (2) the experience rules that were GIVEN to the agent as guidance, and (3) the agent's full execution trace, which ended in FAILURE. Your job: decide whether any SINGLE one of the GIVEN rules MISLED the agent and contributed to the failure. Be conservative: only blame a rule when you can point to the specific step where following it caused harm. Answer in EXACTLY this two-line format: VERDICT: <the NUMBER of the single at-fault rule, or NONE> REASON: <one sentence> 

Key design: 

• Attributes to at most one rule (prevents blame dilution) 

• Must point to the specific step where the rule caused harm 

• Conservative: unused or unrelated rules should not be blamed 

• Strict two-line output format for parsing 

B.5.3 CONTRADICT Template. Source : ttse/prompts/templat es/human.py — ONLINE_CONTRADICTION_TEMPLATE 

Below is the RETIRED POOL -- rules that were learned, later BLAMED for causing task failures, and retired. When two or more retired rules CONTRADICT each other on the SAME attribute of the environment, that signals the environment's behavior is CONDITIONAL. Your job: identify genuine contradictions, and SYNTHESIZE a single new CONDITIONAL TIP "under <condition>: <action>" that reconciles them. Only synthesize when there is a GENUINE contradiction. If none, output NONE. Output format: [TIP] under <condition>: <action> 

B.5.4 Fusion LLM Induction Prompt. Source : fusion/llm_induc er.py — INDUCE_SYSTEM_PROMPT 

You are an expert agent skill analyst. Extract reusable knowledge from failed agent trajectories. Two types of rules: 1. FACT (declarative): A statement about the environment, tools, or constraints. 2. TIP (conditional procedural): A "when X, do Y" heuristic. Rules must be: Specific, actionable, grounded in the trajectory, one issue each. Maximum 3 FACTs and 3 TIPs per analysis. Output: JSON array [{"type": "fact", "rule": "..."}, {"type": "tip", ...}] 

B.5.5 Single-Track Induction Prompt. Source : fusion/llm_induc er_single.py — INDUCE_SYSTEM_PROMPT_SINGLE 

Key differences from the dual-track version: 

• No FACT/TIP type distinction; unified as "rule" type 

14 TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework for LLM Agents 

• Induction cap reduced from 3+3=6 to maximum 6 rules 

• Type definitions and examples removed, letting the LLM freely determine rule granularity 

## B.6 Core Mechanism Details 

B.6.1 Algorithmic Formulation. Algorithm 1 states the complete online procedure and mirrors the reference implementation. The two tracks operationalize the two error terms of our framework (Section 4): the FACT bank F manages environment-representation regret, while the TIP bank T manages conditional-execution regret. Training tasks are consumed in 𝑁 sequential chunks; each chunk triggers one blame →retire →contradict/synthesize →induce update, and chunk 1 is a cold start with no injected rules so that the initial bank is induced purely from experience. Here Select embeds the task description and every candidate rule with 𝑔 and returns the top-𝐾 𝐹 FACTs and top-𝐾 𝑇 TIPs by cosine similarity ( topk mode), or the count-sorted bank truncated by the budgets ( all mode). Blame is capped at one rule per failure to avoid dilution. The dual subject/necessity judgment that types each induced rule lives inside the induction prompt (no external classifier) and defaults to TIP under uncertainty, preventing FACT contamination. Apply realizes the count-voting lifecycle of Table 10 (ADD +2, AGREE +1, EDIT +1, REMOVE −1 or −3, auto-deletion at count ≤ 0). In the deployment setting (PinchBench), the same procedure operates on consecutive mini-batches of approximately 10 tasks, with bank updates after each batch and top-𝐾 retrieval performed at the individual-task level. 

B.6.2 Dual-Channel Rule Representation and Lifecycle. Storage format (expel.py ):  

> rule_items_with_count = [(text, count, rtype), ...] # rtype: "fact"|" tip"

Count voting mechanism (update_rules ): 

Table 10: Count-based rule voting operations. 

Operation Count Change Description 

ADD +2 New rule enters with count=2 (initial trust) AGREE +1 Reinforce existing rule REMOVE −1 or −3 −1 (similar/redundant); −3 (contra-dictory) EDIT +1 Rewrite rule text, count+=1 count ≤ 0 Delete Rules with zero or negative count auto-removed 

Rule lifecycle :

> ADD (count=2) |-- AGREE --> count+1 --> strengthened |-- REMOVE --> count-1/-3 --> count<=0 --> deleted |-- EDIT --> rewrite text, count+1 |-- BLAME --> RETIRE --> retired_pool --> CONTRADICT --> new TIP

Dual-channel independent numbering (_build_critique_ prompt ): 

> FACTS: 1. [FACT rule 1] 2. [FACT rule 2] TIPS: 1. [TIP rule 1] 2. [TIP rule 2]

EDIT operations use intra-channel numbering: [FACT] EDIT 2 

refers to the 2nd rule in the FACTS section. The LLM resolves this via intra-channel index lookup:       

> chan = [i for i, r in enumerate (rules) if r[2] == rtype] rule_index = chan[num - 1] # intra-channel num --> global index

B.6.3 Online Chunk-Loop: Five Phases. File : online_train.py 

(main loop) + agent/online.py (phase implementations)   

> for chunk_idx in range(num_chunks): [TRAIN] Load chunk_bank_snapshot, inject rules, run all tasks [BLAME] Parallel 20-way: LLM blames each failure trace (subprocess 600s timeout guard) [RETIRE] Sequential: blame_count >= threshold --> retire to pool [CONTRADICT] LLM scans retired pool for contradictions, synthesizes conditional TIPs [INDUCE] create_rules(keep_bank=True): compare stage + all_success stage --> incrementally EDIT/AGREE/REMOVE/ADD --> save c{chunk+1}.pkl

Key design constraints: 

(1) BLAME before INDUCE : Blame depends on chunk_bank _snapshot (frozen during training). If induce runs first, it may EDIT/REMOVE the blamed rule → retire phase cannot find target → silent no-op. (2) At most one rule blamed per failure : Prevents blame dilution; blame_threshold=1 means retire on first blame. (3) Subprocess guard : Each blame LLM call runs in an independent subprocess with 600s timeout, prevent-ing langchain tenacity hangs (SIGALRM not caught by tenacity). Uses max_retries=0 + subprocess.Popen +

communicate() .(4) 20-way ThreadPoolExecutor parallel blame : _llm_c all internally spawns subprocess; proc.communicate() 

releases GIL → true concurrency. 

B.6.4 Rule Injection and Vector Retrieval. Injection decision (ag ent/expel.py — insert_before_task_prompt ): 

• inject_rules_in_training : online training mode → in-ject chunk_bank_snapshot 

• !no_rules : eval mode → inject final bank 

Injection mode (_select_rules_for_task ): 

• rule_injection=all : Full injection (truncated by 

top_n_facts /top_n_tips )

• rule_injection=topk : Use sentence-transformers to em-bed task description and rule text, take cosine-similarity top-K ( num_relevant_rules per channel) 

Rendering order (by count descending, per channel):     

> Environmental facts (discovered from experience): 1. [fact 1] (count=5) 2. [fact 2] (count=3) Tips: 1. under <condition>: <action> (count=7) 2. under <condition>: <action> (count=4)

## B.7 Bayesian Fusion Architecture 

Objective : Migrate TTSE’s dual-channel rules into the Bayesian-Agent (BA) framework, replacing heuristic count voting with Bayesian posteriors. 

15 Ruimin Pei, Yongkang Wu, Shangyi Zheng, Yaqing Zhang, Deyang Li, Jianjun Tao, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiang Zhang 

Algorithm 1 TTSE: Two-Track Online Self-Evolution (one training run) 

Input: task chunks {C 𝑘 }𝑁 𝑘 =1; LLM M; embedder 𝑔 ; per-task budgets 𝐾 𝐹 , 𝐾 𝑇 ; blame threshold 𝜏 

Output: evolved FACT bank F and TIP bank T 

> 1:

F ← ∅ ; T ← ∅ ; P ← ∅ ⊲ FACT bank, TIP bank, retired pool  

> 2:

for 𝑘 = 1 to 𝑁 do  

> 3:

if 𝑘 = 1 then  

> 4:

R𝑘 ← ∅ ⊲ cold start: zero-knowledge induction  

> 5:

else  

> 6:

R𝑘 ← Select (F , T , C𝑘 , 𝑔, 𝐾 𝐹 , 𝐾 𝑇 ) ⊲ top-𝐾 per channel by cosine sim.  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

Ξ𝑘 ← ∅  

> 9:

for each task 𝑡 ∈ C 𝑘 do  

> 10:

𝜉 ← Run (M , 𝑡, R𝑘 ); Ξ𝑘 ← Ξ𝑘 ∪ { 𝜉 } ⊲ execute with injected rules  

> 11:

end for 

Phase 1 — Blame  

> 12:

𝐵 𝑘 ← ∅  

> 13:

for each failed 𝜉 ∈ Ξ𝑘 in parallel do  

> 14:

𝑟 ← Blame (M , 𝜉, R𝑘 ) ⊲ attribute failure to ≤ 1 injected rule  

> 15:

if 𝑟 ≠ ⊥ then  

> 16:

𝐵 𝑘 ← 𝐵 𝑘 ∪ {( 𝑟, 𝜉 )}  

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

end for 

Phase 2 — Retire  

> 19:

for each rule 𝑟 with blame_count (𝑟 ) ≥ 𝜏 do  

> 20:

move 𝑟 from the active bank to P, appending audit (reason , 𝑘 ) 

> 21:

end for 

Phase 3 — Contradict/Synthesize  

> 22:

for each contradictory pair (𝑟 𝑎 , 𝑟 𝑏 ) in P identified by M do  

> 23:

𝑐 ← Condition (M , 𝑟 𝑎 , 𝑟 𝑏 ) ⊲ surface the hidden condition  

> 24:

T ← T ∪ { “under 𝑐 : ⟨action ⟩”} ⊲ new conditioned TIP  

> 25:

end for 

Phase 4 — Induce (keep_bank)  

> 26:

Δ ← Compare (M , Ξ𝑘 )⊕ SuccessOnly (M , Ξ𝑘 ) ⊲ typed ops; FACT/TIP by dual-judgment  

> 27:

for each typed operation (op , 𝑟, 𝑟 ′, ℓ ) ∈ Δ do  

> 28:

Apply (op , 𝑟, 𝑟 ′, ℓ ) on (F , T ) ⊲ count-vote: ADD +2/AGREE +1/REMOVE/EDIT +1 

> 29:

end for  

> 30:

persist bank snapshot for chunk 𝑘 +1 

> 31:

end for  

> 32:

return (F , T ) 

B.7.1 Core Components. 1. DualTrackBank (fusion/dual_trac k_bank.py ): 

• Stores FACT/TIP rules, each associated with a SkillBelief 

(Bayesian posterior) 

• alpha/beta start from uniform prior Beta(1,1) → updated on observed success/failure 

• RewritePolicy decisions :

– 𝑃 (success ) < 0.45 and beta ≥ 4 → retire – 𝑃 (success ) ≥ 0.72 and observations ≥ 3 → stable/-compress – Otherwise → explore 

• Targeted credit assignment (record_task_outcome_ targeted ): Only updates rules relevant to the task (ren-dered + matching failure_mode); newly induced rules are not penalized 

2. LLM Inducer (fusion/llm_inducer.py ): 

• Uses DeepSeek API to extract FACT/TIP from failure tra-jectories 

• Model: deepseek-v4-flash (default), temperature=0.3 

• Maximum 3 FACT + 3 TIP per failure trajectory 

• Includes JSON parsing + fallback (FACT:/TIP: line-level parsing) 

3. apply_patches.py — Runtime monkey-patching: 

• Pure-Fusion track (ALFWorld / Sciworld / SOP-Bench / GDPevo): Injects only DualTrackBank rules; no BA cata-log/distill noise 

• BA track (lifelong_agentbench etc.): Three-layer fusion of BA built-in rules + catalog + Fusion rules 

4. Bayesian Core (bayesian_agent/core/ ): 

> 16

TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework for LLM Agents 

Table 11: Bayesian core module reference. 

Module Function 

belief.py —

SkillBelief 

Posterior belief: alpha/beta counts, context-aware prediction 

policy.py —

RewritePolicy 

Maps posterior to action: retire/patch/split/com-press/explore 

evidence.py —

TrajectoryEvidence 

Standardized evidence: task_id, outcome, tokens, failure_mode, turns 

discovery.py —

discover_failure 

Auto-discovers failure modes (SQL error / empty / format / mismatch / runtime) 

repair.py Incremental repair: dedup, merge baseline+repair, summarize 

Table 12: Comparison between TTSE core (EXPEL) path and Fusion (BA) path. 

Dimension TTSE Core (EXPEL) Fusion (BA Path) 

Rule weighting Heuristic count vote (+1/ −1/ −3) Bayesian posterior 𝑃 (success )

Rule retirement blame ≥ threshold → re-tire 

𝑃 (success ) < 0.45 & 𝛽 ≥

4 → retire Rule induction LLM critique (compare + all_success) LLM induce_from_failure (fail-ure only) Credit assign-ment Global blame Targeted (rendered + matching failure_mode) Online loop 5-phase chunk-loop Per-task online update Scope ALFWorld / Sciworld /GDPevo SOP-Bench / BA benchmarks 

B.7.2 TTSE Core vs. Bayesian Fusion Comparison. B.7.3 Single-Track Ablation Experiment. Purpose : Isolate the in-dependent contribution of FACT/TIP dual-channel classification to Bayesian Fusion online evolution. 

Design :

• Remove FACT/TIP distinction; unify all rules as "rule" 

type 

• Retain Bayesian belief update mechanism (SkillBelief + RewritePolicy + targeted credit assignment) 

• Rule injection as single list “Learned Rules” with confidence 

[P=xx%, n=xx] , top-16 

• Uses DualTrackBank but all rules stored in a single channel (single-track stored in TIP slot) 

Comparison baseline :

Table 13: Single-track ablation comparison design. 

Configuration Rule Type Belief Update Injection 

Baseline None None No rule injection Single-track ablation Unified “rule” Bayesian posterior Single list top-16 Dual-track Fusion FACT + TIP Bayesian posterior Dual-channel top-8 each 

Key findings (see Section 5.2 for full results): 

• Bayesian update is the primary driver: single-track +12.4pp vs. baseline, dual-track +15.4pp 

• FACT/TIP classification contributes an additional accuracy gain of +3.0pp 

• Dual-track rules are on average 18% shorter (137 vs. 167 chars/rule); the warehouse_package_inspection domain shows the largest gap (+14.4pp) 

17 Ruimin Pei, Yongkang Wu, Shangyi Zheng, Yaqing Zhang, Deyang Li, Jianjun Tao, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiang Zhang 

## C Statistical Analysis and Warehouse Case Study 

This appendix provides the statistical significance analysis of the SOPBench experimental results and illustrative case studies of FAC-T/TIP complementary mechanisms in the warehouse domain. All experiments use the deepseek-v4-flash model via the official DeepSeek API ( https://api.deepseek.com ). 

## C.1 Statistical Methods 

C.1.1 Significance Testing. 

• Bootstrap CI : 10,000 bootstrap resamples of the paired differences, with 2.5% and 97.5% quantiles forming the 95% confidence interval. 

• Permutation test : For each pair, randomly flip the sign of the difference under 𝐻 0 : Δ = 0. After 10,000 permutations, the 𝑝 -value is the proportion where |permuted mean | ≥ |observed mean |.

• Bonferroni correction : 5 domains → 𝛼 = 0.05 /5 = 0.01 for per-domain significance. 

## C.2 Overall Results 

Table 14: Overall SOPBench statistical significance results.              

> Metric Value
> Single-track (3-run mean) 91.59% Dual-track Fusion (3-run mean) 94.58%
> Δ(Dual −Single) +2.99pp
> 95% Bootstrap CI [+2.34pp, +3.65pp] Permutation 𝑝 <10 −4
> Significance ★ ★ ★ (far exceeds Bonferroni threshold)

Conclusion : The Dual-Fusion advantage over Single-track is highly statistically significant ( 𝑝 < 10 −4; no exceedance observed in 10,000 permutations) in the task-level paired test, and cannot be attributed to random fluctuation. 

## C.3 Per-Domain Analysis 

Key findings :(1) warehouse and referral are the two domains that individ-ually achieve Bonferroni-corrected significance ( 𝑝 < 0.01). (2) aircraft and customer are nominally significant ( 𝑝 < 0.05) but not after Bonferroni correction—these domains exhibit a strong ceiling effect (Single already reaches 97.6%–97.9%), leaving minimal room for improvement. (3) dangerous_goods shows a slight Single advantage (−0.61pp), but the difference is not significant ( 𝑝 = 0.30); the two configurations cannot be statistically distinguished in this domain. (4) warehouse contributes +2.32pp (78% of the total Δ), mak-ing it the domain with the strongest separation between the two configurations. 

## C.4 Robustness Check: Excluding Warehouse 

Interpretation : Excluding warehouse, the Dual advantage drops from +2.99pp to +0.67pp, but remains positive with a CI lower bound above 0. This shows that: 

• Warehouse is the largest contributor (78%), but not the only one 

• Referral (+1.83pp, 𝑝 < 0.0001) independently contributes significant gains 

• Across the 4 remaining domains, there is a systematic posi-tive drift of +0.67pp, with 4 of 5 domains favoring Dual 

• Even without warehouse, Dual-Fusion still outper-forms Single , just shifting from a “large lead” to a “small but consistent” one 

## C.5 Warehouse FACT/TIP Case Study: Complementary Mechanisms 

Warehouse is the most difficult domain in SOPBench (baseline only 26.7%) and the domain where Dual-Fusion shows the largest advantage (+14.44pp vs. Single). Below are representative cases of FACT/TIP complementarity from the Dual-Fusion r0 bank (42 FACTs + 50 TIPs). 

C.5.1 Pattern 1: Formula (FACT) + When-to-Use (TIP). FACT 

(declarative, 𝛼 = 35): 

The chargeback amount formula is (ordered_quantity 

− received_quantity) × unit_cost , independent of the chargeable flag. 

TIP (conditional, 𝛼 = 21): 

When barcode_match is False and problem_type is “Wrong Item”, skip the calculateChargeback step and set charge_back_amt = 0.0 directly. 

→ FACT states how the chargeback is computed; TIP states 

when not to compute it. The two are non-redundant: FACT de-fines the general formula, and TIP provides a specific-scope override rule. 

C.5.2 Pattern 2: Semantic Convention (FACT) + Output Format (TIP). 

FACT (𝛼 = 27): 

The expected CSV output treats charge_back_amt as an empty string (not numeric zero) when no chargeback is required. 

FACT (𝛼 = 27): 

In the original dataset, rows not requiring chargeback have charge_back_amt as NaN; the expected output replaces NaN with an empty string. 

TIP (𝛼 = 22): 

When resolution_status is “Return to Vendor” (barcode mismatch), set charge_back_amt to the empty string ”” rather than 0.0. 

→ FACT describes the data format’s “unwritten rule” (the semantic difference between empty string vs. 0.0); TIP pro-vides the concrete operational step. 

C.5.3 Pattern 3: Tool Behavior (FACT) + Corrective Strategy (TIP). 

FACT (𝛼 = 32): 

The calculateChargeback tool does NOT automatically respect the chargeable flag in quantity variance; the agent must enforce this manually. 

TIP (𝛼 = 26): 

When quantity variance = 0 and chargeable flag is False, regardless of what calculateChargeback returns, set charge_back_amt = 0.0 in the output CSV. 

> 18 TTSE: A Two-Track Online Self-Evolution Framework for LLM Agents

Table 15: Per-domain statistical analysis. ★ ★ ★ : 𝑝 < 0.01 after Bonferroni correction; ns: not significant.     

> Domain Tasks Single Dual

Δ 95% CI 𝑝 Result aircraft_inspection 112 97.6% 98.8% +1.19pp [+0.30, +2.18] 0.022 ns customer_service 156 97.9% 98.9% +1.07pp [+0.21, +1.92] 0.022 ns dangerous_goods 274 94.6% 94.0% −0.61pp [−1.66, +0.49] 0.296 ns referral_abuse 200 97.7% 99.5% +1.83pp [+1.11, +2.61] < 10 −4 ★ ★ ★       

> warehouse_pkg_insp 150 66.9% 81.3% +14.44pp [+11.48, +17.26]

< 10 −4 ★ ★ ★ 

Table 16: Robustness analysis excluding the warehouse do-main.  

> Metric Value

Δ excluding warehouse +0.67pp   

> 95% Bootstrap CI [+0.18pp, +1.17pp] Permutation

𝑝 0.011 Significance ★ (nominally significant; not Bonferroni-corrected) 

→ FACT exposes the tool’s limitation (unreliable default behavior); TIP provides the concrete strategy to bypass the tool. Table 17: FACT vs. TIP complementarity in the warehouse domain.            

> Dimension FACT (Environmental) TIP (Behavioral) Question an-swered “What is the env like?” “What should I do here?” Verifiability Verifiable by observation Empirical summary Example content Formulas, semantics, tool be-havior Skip step, override, format Avg. length (r0) 125 chars 145 chars
> Count (r0) 42 50

C.5.4 Complementarity Summary. FACTs are shorter (125 vs. 145 chars, −14%), because declarative facts do not require “When. . . then. . . ” conditional structures. The FACT/TIP classifica-tion constraint forces the LLM to distinguish “what it observed” from “what lesson it learned” when generating rules, naturally suppressing overfitting noise that would otherwise be generated as one-off task-specific fixes. 

## C.6 Rule Quality Comparison (Warehouse r0) 

Table 18: Single-track vs. Dual-track rule characteristics in the warehouse domain (r0).        

> Metric Single-track Dual-track Fusion
> Active rules 28 92 (42F + 50T) Mean length 162 chars 136 chars (

−16%) Median length 158 134 Length range [92, 227] [50, 239] 

Qualitative differences : Single-track rules tend to be over-fitted to specific failure cases (e.g., “When handling warehouse tasks, avoid mismatch: expected={}, got=’2764.5’{}”—a one-off fix hard-coded to a particular task). Dual-track rules, constrained by the FACT/TIP classification, are more structured: FACTs capture reusable declarative properties (e.g., “chargeback amount = (or-dered − received) × unit_cost”), while TIPs capture conditional strategies with explicit scope (e.g., “skip chargeback when barcode mismatch”). The classification constraint naturally suppresses rules that cannot be categorized as either FACT or TIP, filtering out much of the overfitting noise. 

> 19 Ruimin Pei, Yongkang Wu, Shangyi Zheng, Yaqing Zhang, Deyang Li, Jianjun Tao, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiang Zhang

## D PinchBench Methodology Disclosure 

This appendix documents the full experimental methodology for the PinchBench deployment experiment reported in Section 5.3, so that the result can be independently reproduced and audited. The disclosure covers six aspects. 

(D.1) Models. The executing agent is driven by GLM-5 (the same backbone used in the ALFWorld and ScienceWorld experiments). Task scoring is performed by an independent judge model; we use 

deepseek-chat as the judge, which scores each of the 147 tasks on a continuous [0, 1] scale. The judge is run independently of the FACT/TIP evolution loop: it sees only the task prompt and the agent’s produced artifact, never the bank contents, so the judge cannot be biased by which rules were injected. 

(D.2) Software versions. The general-purpose agent harness is OpenClaw (versions 2026.7.1-2 ). The evaluation harness is PinchBench (version 2.0.0 , pinned to commit 819384ae ). Both version strings are reported verbatim so that any reported number can be traced to an exact code state. Real system names are retained for reproducibility. 

(D.3) Rule-bank provenance. The FACT and TIP banks used during evaluation are not hand-written. They are produced by TTSE’s online evolution loop: PinchBench’s 147 tasks are parti-tioned into 15 consecutive groups of 10 (with the final group taking the remainder), and the bank is updated after each group. Across the three independent TTSE runs (r0, r1, r2), the bank was evolved online from scratch; the final banks typically contained on the order of 35–50 FACT rules and 30–45 TIP rules. The bank is therefore a learned artifact, not a curated one. 

(D.4) Leakage protocol. PinchBench is a streaming deployment benchmark, not a fixed train/test split. There is no held-out test set that the bank is forbidden to see: by construction, every task’s expe-rience may contribute to the bank that is later used for subsequent tasks. We report the only leakage guarantee that this protocol sup-ports: within a single task, the agent has zero self-leakage (a task’s own solution is never injected back into the agent for that same task). Cross-task information transfer is the intended behavior of an online self-evolving agent and is not treated as contamination. Because there is no held-out split, no generalization gap is reported. 

(D.5) Real runtime execution. Every reported task score is pro-duced by a real end-to-end agent run: the agent performs multi-step tool calls (file reads/writes, shell commands, browser automation where applicable) and writes a genuine artifact to the workspace, which the judge then scores. No score is synthesized, mocked, or template-filled; trajectories and produced artifacts are retained in the released artifact. 

(D.6) Non-invasive injection. TTSE integrates with OpenClaw via workspace-file injection rather than by modifying the agent’s control loop. At the start of each task, the retrieval module writes the top-10 FACT rules (by cosine similarity to the task prompt, encoded with all-MiniLM-L6-v2 , 384-dim) into ENVIRONMENT.md 

and the top-10 TIP rules into TIPS.md in the task workspace; the agent’s system prompt instructs it to consult these two files. The baseline ( TTSE_ENABLE=0 ) differs only in that these files are not written. This guarantees that the baseline–TTSE gap isolates the contribution of injected experience, with no change to the planner, tool layer, or judge.