Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via
Saliency-Driven Supervision
Nitish Dashoraa,$, Douglas Chenb,$, Idan Shenfelda, John Marangolaa,
Pulkit Agrawala,†, Max Simchowitzb,†
$Project lead. †Equal advising.
a Massachusetts Institute of Technology
b Carnegie Mellon University
Average Task Performance
Success Rate (%)
0
25
50
75
100
DP Naive VLM Ours
91.5
66.8
53.8
25.5
…
o1 o2
o4
ot
z
{
{
fϕ
gψ
VLM
o3
πθ̂
at:t+H
reconstruct
Figure 1: We propose the Workspace Model, an architecture trained to produce compressed latent repre-
sentations of history used for downstream policy learning. Workspace Models are trained by encoding raw
histories and reconstructing high-level salient information, as judged by a VLM, thus amortizing test-time
compute. Across real and simulated tasks, our model solves memory-intensive tasks with low latency.
a{dashora, idanshen, jmgola, pulkitag}@mit.edu
b{dchen3, msimchow}@andrew.cmu.edu
Date: September 18, 2026
Abstract
Complex robotic manipulation tasks frequently require a long-term memory of past events and
actions. As conditioning on full histories renders policies prone to spurious correlations and de-
grades performance, many approaches to policy memory involve compressing historical information
through expensive VLM queries in-the-loop to process only task-salient information. In this paper,
we propose an alternative approach in which computationally intensive VLM queries are made dur-
ing train-time to learn a lightweight latent memory that can be efficiently queried at deployment
time. Our representation, which we call the workspace token, is trained by (1) using a VLM to
identify current and historical information necessary for completing a task, then (2) distilling these
into the workspace token using a set-reconstruction decoder loss. In both simulation and hardware,
we show that the workspace token can be used as a drop-in replacement for observations during
deployment, enabling policies to solve memory-intensive tasks without the need for VLM reasoning
in-the-loop. Interestingly, we found that workspace tokens are not only more lightweight but also
lead to better policy performance.
arXiv:2609.20820v1  [cs.RO]  17 Sep 2026


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
1
Introduction
Solving hard decision-making problems requires memory of long temporal windows, as relevant infor-
mation for control may be contained in prior observations [Kaelbling et al., 1998]. Despite the need for
memory, today’s large-scale robot architectures are conditioned on either a single [Black et al., 2024,
Zitkovich et al., 2023, Kim et al., 2024, Intelligence et al., 2025] or a short subsequence of past obser-
vations [Chi et al., 2023, Zhao et al., 2023, Shafiullah et al., 2022]. This is because naively increasing
observation history can introduce generalization error during training [Kelly Hong, 2025] as irrele-
vant past frames make learned behaviors susceptible to latching onto spurious correlations with current
actions and can also cause the model to encounter histories outside the policy’s training distribution
[Geirhos et al., 2020, De Haan et al., 2019]. Distribution shift is worsened by compounding online
error typical in imitation learning [Ross and Bagnell, 2010, Ross et al., 2011, Simchowitz et al., 2025].
These challenges are exacerbated in robotic applications, where data is considerably more limited and
high dimensional than in natural language processing.
The challenges of memory have motivated numerous attempts to produce summaries of task history
which contain what we term salient information: a limited amount of information from past frames
needed to complete the task. Such compressed histories are still sufficient for task success, but limit
extraneous or distracting information that may harm generalization. The most popular approach has
been to deploy a powerful pre-trained model, such as a vision-language model (VLM), alongside the
robot to provide explicit natural-language summaries of past events [Torne et al., 2026] or to select a
limited number of relevant observation frames [Sridhar et al., 2025, Mark et al., 2026].
However, querying powerful models in robotics comes at a cost. Reactive policies must continually
make queries, incurring high computational cost and suffering from latency that slows robot policies,
introduces aliasing effects, and renders deployments more brittle. Moreover, imperfect summaries, e.g.
those that lack key salient information, limit policy performance. This introduces a tradeoff where
larger or more powerful models can provide more reliable summaries, but introduce greater latency at
test-time, leading to the issues described above. For example, a medium-sized VLM [Team et al., 2025]
can provide text-based summaries at lower latency, but text is limited in its ability to capture salient past
details. Image-selection [Mark et al., 2026] can provide more information, but is more computationally
demanding at inference time. Therefore, this work proposes an alternative solution:
Rather than using powerful models for deployment-time history curation, we can instead
leverage them for training-time supervision of a lightweight, latent representation of
memory.
Our Contributions.
Concretely, we introduce workspace models: a lightweight memory encoder for
robotic policies that achieves high performance in tasks that require long-term memory, without the
deployment-time computation required by VLM-in-the-loop models.1 Compared to these approaches,
workspace models exploit a key asymmetry in robot learning: test-time compute scaling must stay
limited at deployment and training data is hard to scale, but training-time compute scaling can be
exploited. Workspace models take advantage by leveraging a new scaling axis we term saliency-driven
supervision, where we expend inference compute on strong models to provide saliency labels at training
time, which we use to train a compact encoder that captures all relevant historical information.
We compare workspace models to a number of representative baselines, including a VLM-based
frame selection, similar to Mark et al. [2026] across simulated and real-world tasks that require long-
term memory for counting, spatial recall, and test-time adaptation. Across these tasks, workspace mod-
1Our approach is inspired by Global Workspace Theory in cognitive psychology, which posits that human beings maintain
a bottleneck of information relevant to decision-making, memory, and perception [Bengio, 2019, Baars, 2005]
2


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
els enable effective memory with limited latency. Surprisingly, workspace outperforms test-time key-
frame selection, due to a number of key design advantages that we expose through careful ablations.
Ultimately, we view the workspace model as both
• Opening the door to novel architecture design for long-horizon memory
• A compelling proof of concept for saliency-driven supervision in domains where training data
are scarce and/or computation is constrained at test-time
To this end, we stress that this manuscript’s implementation of a workspace model—using keyframe
patches for saliency-driven supervision—serves as only a preliminary instantiation of the workspace
principle, and look forward to future work which investigates other modalities of supervision, including
text and video, as well as applying the workspace principle across domains.
2
Background: Training History-Based Robotic Policies
Figure
2:
Performance degrades with
POMDP horizon.
Preliminaries.
We operate in the visual imitation learn-
ing setting.
For a given task, we assume a dataset of N
expert demonstration trajectories, D = {τk}N
k=1. Each tra-
jectory is an ordered sequence of observations and actions
τk = [(oi, ai)]T
i=1 with some episode length, T. Each obser-
vation contains the present image and proprioceptive state,
ot = [It, xt]. The objective is to learn a receding horizon
control policy π(at:t+H | history) where H is the action pre-
diction horizon and history is some conditioning variable
depending on o1:t.
History-conditioned Policy Learning.
Naively, one can
select history = o1:T to be all past observations.
How-
ever, prior work has identified a number of challenges with
this approach. Long histories introduce the risk of overfitting
since spurious correlates inside irrelevant historical informa-
tion can be used to learn “shortcuts” [Geirhos et al., 2020] for
action prediction that do not generalize to the online rollout
distribution. In imitation learning, this can surface as “causal
confusion” [De Haan et al., 2019] or “copycat behavior” [Wen
et al., 2020] where the model exhibits poor performance by
predicting actions from incorrect cues or simply copying pre-
vious actions, respectively.
To illustrate this intuition, we train state-based policies
with varying history requirements to navigate to a point goal, g ∈{−1,+1} at a timestep L, starting
from x0 = 0; however, g is only shown to the agent once at some salient time ts ∼U (1, L). Therefore, to
succeed at reaching g for some L, the agent must have an observation history of size L or more. As seen
in Figure 2, when training a policy conditioned on full history, the success rate degrades with increasing
values of L, and even appears to saturate even as the number of demonstrations grows. As robot data
is typically limited, the data-demands of naive history conditioning render the approach infeasible.
History Summarization for Robot Policy Learning.
Here, we describe past approaches to mitigating
the challenges associated with history-conditioning; we defer an extended related work to Appendix A.
3


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Saliency Set Pipeline
⋮
⋮
⋮
Pool
DinoV3
Tokenizer
Workspace Decoder
⋮
⋮
Workpace Encoder
⋮
⋮
⋮
,
,
,
⋮
⋮
⋮
Tokenizer
⋮
Action Chunk
Set Reconstruction Loss
cat
Figure 3: Workspace Model Training (left): Training involves tokenizing the image and proprioception through
DinoV3 and a learned projection, respectively. These tokens are combined with an input slot at every timestep
and fed to the workspace encoder to produce workspace tokens. Each workspace token, wt, is supervised to re-
construct the set St through a Hungarian matching set reconstruction loss on the workspace decoder outputs. Im-
itative Model Training (right): Images and proprioception are fed into the tokenization and workspace pipeline
to produce a short history of workspace tokens. These are used as input to train a Diffusion Policy πθ, along with
the raw proprioception, to output the future action chunks.
As mentioned in the Introduction, recent methods use a large model online to curate a task-relevant
subset of observations ot1,..., otk or language summary lt to feed into a downstream learner. For ex-
ample, Torne et al. [2026] propose using a VLM to maintain a language memory and produce language
subtasks for a downstream language-action model (VLA). Sridhar et al. [2025] similarly build a high-
level policy for VLA subtask generation but maintain a visual keyframe memory through a VLM and
find that text-only memory does not capture all information necessary for planning. Mark et al. [2026]
directly use an API-queried VLM to select keyframes to persistently feed into a Diffusion Policy [Chi
et al., 2023] and handle latency through masking recent frames, however still report latency-related
failure modes. Crucially, all of these methods rely on using large-scale VLMs during inference-time for
memory selection. Querying these large models takes time, which introduces significant latency dur-
ing the robot tasks. This compromises policy reactivity, harming success rates on more dynamic tasks
[Mark et al., 2026, Sridhar et al., 2025]. Moreover, large model queries incur significant financial cost,
either because robots must ship with expensive GPUs, or pay for costly API queries whenever memory
is needed. Finally, the summary generation system must consistently provide all sufficient informa-
tion to prevent online catastrophic failures; this introduces a trade-off between summary quality and
generation latency/computational expense.
3
Amortizing History Summarization via Workspace Models
In this work, we introduce the workspace model (Figure 3), a training pipeline and architecture that
amortizes VLM queries during train-time to produce compact, latent summaries of salient history infor-
mation. By design, our approach reduces the computational burden associated with querying powerful
models at deployment time.
Workspace models train an autoregressive encoder wt = fφ(o1:t) to produce a latent summary we
4


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
call the workspace token wt. During training, we use VLMs to curate a small salient set St of im-
age patches from past and current visual observations which a VLM deems salient for determining the
optimal action at (Section 3.2). Whereas prior work conditions on curated salient information at de-
ployment, we instead train the encoder so that wt encodes all the information in the salient set St. This
is accomplished by co-training fφ with a decoder gψ(wt) and penalizing the set-distance between the
latter’s predictions and the ground truth St. Finally, we freeze the encoder fφ, and learn a reactive,
workspace-conditioned policy which produces actions from a short history of frozen workspace embed-
dings and proprioceptive states πθ(at:t+H | wt:t−C, xt:t−C). Via this approach, the reactive policy has
access to a compact, latent history summary that contains all salient past information.
Representing Salient Information via Key-Patch Reconstruction.
Given that salient events in ma-
nipulation tasks are often localized in space and time, we choose to represent the salient set St as an
indexed set of DinoV3 [Siméoni et al., 2025] patch tokens from the images observed thus far. Con-
cretely, St = {pt;i}m
i=1 where pt;i consists of the Dino patch token at location ℓi chosen from the image
at time ti. We note that the Dino patches already contain an encoding of their patch location ℓi. The
saliency set is capped to be at most m patches. In Section 3.2 below, we describe how these patches
are labeled and selected via prompted VLMs. We remark that this is only one possible representation of
salient information, and leave exploration of other approaches to future work.
Workspace Encoder Architecture.
We choose to parameterize the workspace encoder, fφ as a trans-
former with causal masking that receives a sequence of input tokens, [(¯ot′,zt′)]t′≤t, where, ¯ot′ =
tokenize(ot′) are the Dino patch tokens of the observation in time t′. The zt′ are inputs whose corre-
sponding output-slots are the learned workspace tokens wt′ (Appendix B), initialized to be zt′
i.i.d.
∼N(0,I).
Applying the encoder to this sequence, fφ([(¯ot′,zt′)]t′≤t), produces the sequence of workspace tokens
w1:t.
3.1
Workspace Model Training
Importantly, we represent salient information as a set St, which can be variable in size. Set structure
necessitates specialized training and decoder design choices, which we describe here. We opt to train
our decoder gψ following the DETR framework [Carion et al., 2020] for set reconstruction. Specifically,
we parameterize our decoder gψ as a transformer to cross-attend learnable query tokens to a latent
vector and produce m “slots” (recall: m is the maximum number of patches), each of which predicts
information about a potential candidate set element together with a probability of whether that “slot” is
occupied. Specifically, gψ outputs m pairs gψ(wt) = {(ˆpt;j,βt;j)}m
j=1 consisting of (1) patch reconstruc-
tions ˆpt;j and (2) probabilities βt;j that the slot j is active at time t. The latter accounts for the salient
set potentially containing fewer than m elements.
Encoder/Decoder Training.
Training consists of two steps: a matching step that computes a map-
ping σt between available slots j and patches in St, and a gradient step on a reconstruction loss under
that found matching. Given a binary y ∈{0,1}, let CrossEnt(β; y) := I{y = 1}log(1/β) + I{y =
0}log(1/(1 −β)) denote the standard cross-entropy loss. Moreover, we define a “null patch location”
i = 0, to which we map unoccupied slots j, and define y(i) := I{i̸ = 0}, indicating that i is an active
(non-null) position.
During the matching phase, we follow DETR and invoke the Hungarian algorithm [Kuhn, 1955]
to obtain a map σ : [m] →{0,1,...,|St|} between the m available slots and entries of St or null
location 0. σt is injective into |St| (i.e. never maps two slots j to the same i ≥1, but can map many
j to i = 0), and is computed by minimizing a cumulative matching cost
P
slots j ct(j,σt(j)), where
5


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
(x3, y3), (x4, y4)
(x5, y5)
Is the robot above the box?
Yes
Point at the robot gripper
(x2, y2)
Is the robot above the box?
Yes
Point at the robot gripper
(x1, y1)
Is the robot above the box?
No
Point at the black cubes
Point at the black cubes
Point at the black cubes
None
3
4
5
1
2
Figure 4: Our saliency-supervision pipeline which prompts Qwen (in purple) and MolmoPoint (in pink) to detect
and locate events and build a growing memory. Orange boxes represent visual information which persists in the
salient set over time. Red boxes represent “transient” information for that timestep only.
the cost ct(i, j) := y(i)∥pt;i −ˆpt;j∥2 + λ0CrossEnt(βt;j; y(i)) penalizes mean squared error on non-null
reconstructed patches and cross-entropy term on the indicators y(i) that i is “active”.
Given this matching2 σt, we compute a gradient with respect to a weighted combination of feature
reconstruction (gated by slot j being active) and cross-entropy with the active labels y(i):
L feat
t
:=
1
|St|
X
j
y(σt(j))∥ˆpt;j −pt;σt(j)∥2,
L active
t
= 1
m
m
X
j=1
CrossEnt(βt;j; y(σt(j)))
(3.1)
The full training objective is the sum of these per-timestep losses across the trajectory,
L = Eτ
 T
X
t=1
 λ1L feat
t
+ λ2L active
t


(3.2)
We train this model through mini-batch SGD using the AdamW optimizer and a linear warmup cosine
decay learning rate scheduler. The training parameters are listed in Table 4.
Workspace-Conditioned Policy.
Having learned the workspace encoder fφ, we train the workspace
action-head πθ to predict action-chunks [Zhao et al., 2023] conditioned on a short history of workspace
tokens and proprioceptive states: πθ(at:t+H | wt−C:t, xt−C:t). We implement πθ as a Diffusion Policy
[Chi et al., 2023] further detailed in Appendix B.1.
3.2
VLM Saliency Labeling
We construct the salient set through a two-stage prompting depicted in Figure 4. First, we use the
Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [Bai et al., 2025] model to identify key time steps t′ ≤t where salient events
2Importantly, we do not backpropagate gradients through the computation of σt
6


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Figure 5: Every row depicts a representative demonstration for the tasks in order top-to-bottom: CUBEDROP,
BALANCEBAR, DRAWERRECALL, and HALFANDHALF. The first three rows are selected 3rd-person camera renderings
for the trajectory. The fourth row is the global camera used for training.
occur. Specifically, we provide Qwen with a set of classification questions to evaluate whether any given
frame contains an event relevant to remember (e.g. is the salt put away?). To collect key-frames, we
prompt Qwen with these questions on every frame of every trajectory. As a post-processing step, we
filter out consecutive positive frames using a sliding window to remove redundant key-frames. The
outcome is an ordered list of events to remember (e.g. salt was added to soup at time t = 50, knife was
put in drawer at t = 150).
Subsequently, we use MolmoPoint [Clark et al., 2026], a VLM fine-tuned for open-vocabulary point-
ing, to extract salient patches at a regular frequency (refer to Appendix C for details) and for keyframes.
At the regular frequency, MolmoPoint is given objects to persistently track (specified via prompt). For
keyframes specifically, MolmoPoint is given a separate set of objects to track used only for keyframes.
MolmoPoint then produces 2D coordinates for prompted objects for all keyframes and at the regular
frequency. We collect these keyframe-points from t′ ≤t and any persistent object points at t, effectively
making the salient set contain both what to remember and what to focus on now. We then convert these
points (each associated with a time) to DinoV3 patches by simply choosing the unique patch in time
and space which overlaps with the point. The union of these constitutes the salient set St. We attach
example prompts in Appendix C.
4
Workspace Models Achieve High Task Success with Low Inference La-
tency
In this section, we compare workspace models to a number of history-conditioning baselines. We show,
across simulated and real-world environments, that workspace models enjoy low control latency while
strongly outperforming natural baselines in task success. In the remainder of the section, we describe
the baselines and tasks, and expose the core design decisions that contribute to the strong performance
of workspace models relative to alternatives.
7


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Baselines.
We compare workspace models, denoted Wksp, against three natural baselines: a vanilla
Diffusion Policy, VanillaDP, which uses the current and previous frame as input; a history-conditioned
Diffusion Policy, HistoryDP which conditions a sufficient history of frames by naively striding across
previous observations (we find that full, unstrided history yields 0% success); and finally, Keyframe,
inspired by Mark et al. [2026], which uses a VLM and a tuned prompt to select frames to add into Diffu-
sion Policy context. We report baseline training and architecture details in Appendix B.1. Importantly,
Wksp uses very similar hyperparameters across all simulation and real-world environments. Baselines are
tuned per-task to steelman their performance.
Table 1: Latency comparison across baselines.
Method
Latency (ms)
Relative
VanillaDP
41.3
1.00×
HistoryDP
41.3
1.00×
Keyframe
302
7.31×
Keyframe+Batch
199.5
4.83×
Wksp
94.9
2.3×
Wksp+Batch
52.9
1.28×
Wksp+Batch+KV
49.2
1.19×
Simulation and Hardware Setups.
We evaluate our
methods against four memory-intensive tasks in both
simulation and on real hardware. In simulation, we
use ManiSkill3, built on SAPIEN [Tao et al., 2025,
Chang et al., 2015, Mo et al., 2019, Xiang et al., 2020]
to simulate our experiments on a Franka Research 3
robot [Fra, 2025]. Further details are provided in Ap-
pendix D. For real-world experiments, we use a Franka
FR3 with an AgileX parallel jaw gripper with opera-
tional space control formulation [Khatib, 1987]. Visual
information is collected with a fixed Intel RealSense
D435 global camera. Further details on teleoperation
and controller information are provided in Appendix D.
4.1
Evaluation Tasks: Measuring Different Axes of Memory.
We test, in three simulated and one real task, three distinct memory-usage capabilities: 1) counting
under partial observability; 2) spatial recall and 3) in-context adaptation from past experience. We
describe the tasks at a high level below, and defer details to Appendix D. All baselines are trained via
supervised behavior cloning from demonstrations.
To study the long-range counting capabilities, we design the CUBEDROP task in simulation, inspired
by [Mark et al., 2026], in which a robot must place exactly 5 cubes into a bowl, where cubes leave the
robot’s line-of-sight when correctly placed. We also evaluate on a hardware counterpart, HALFANDHALF,
where the robot must place K ∈{2,4} cubes evenly into two boxes that occlude the visual camera. Both
CUBEDROP and HALFANDHALF necessitate memory, as partial observability obscures the running count
from the current observation, while requiring that the memory does not interfere with precise execution
(cube insertions).
Next, DRAWERRECALL tests spatial recall. Here, another robot first opens and puts a cube away into
one of three drawers, then closes it, and a separate robot (our policy) must open the drawer containing
the stored cube. Finally, we test in-context adaptation, in BALANCEBAR. Here a robot is given two at-
tempts to lift a bar with an unknown center-of-mass (CoM) so that it remains level. The demonstrations
start with lifting from the middle first, revealing the CoM, then grasping at the CoM, resulting in a level
lift. The learned policy must learn to do the same: use history to determine the CoM, and reattempt at
the correct grip position. We show demonstration trajectories in Figure 5.
4.2
Workspace Models Successfully Amortize VLM Reasoning
Recall our central motivation: amortizing slow and computationally-intensive VLM-in-the-loop history
summarization into a lightweight encoder that can be queried efficiently at deployment. Before evalu-
ating downstream policy performance, we verify that this amortization improves run-time.
8


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
(+wrist) (+wrist)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Success rate
Real
45.0% ± 11.1
0.0% ± 0.0
35.0% ± 10.7
85.0% ± 8.0
HalfAndHalf
Simulated
12.0% ± 3.2
51.0% ± 5.0
82.0% ± 3.8
92.0% ± 2.7
CubeDrop
Simulated
22.0% ± 4.1
77.0% ± 4.2
69.0% ± 4.6
100.0% ± 0.0
DrawerRecall
Simulated
23.0% ± 4.2
87.0% ± 3.4
81.0% ± 3.9
89.0% ± 3.1
BalanceBar
Vanilla
History
Keyframe
Workspace
Figure 6: Success rates across 3 simulated (N=100) and 1 real task (N=20). For the real task, we use wrist
cameras for the methods unable to pick the cubes correctly with a global camera only, denoted with “(+wrist)”
Specifically, we measure the average amount of time to run the policy across the previous action
chunk and replan the next chunk (shown in Table 1). We measure relative to VanillaDP and find
that Wksp takes ∼1.2 times as long as a basic CNN perception stack as used in VanillaDP and
HistoryDP. Meanwhile, Keyframe is ∼5 times as costly, which would be significantly worse if using
API call VLMs. We report numbers that leverage KV-caching and stacking observations between chunks
into one batch. Together, these results confirm that workspace models achieve their core design goal -
the expensive reasoning is done at train-time, leaving a lightweight and efficient encoder at deployment.
4.3
Workspace models surprisingly outperform all baselines.
Table 2: Memory / Control failure rates across tasks.
Method
Bar (M/C)
Drawer (M/C)
Cube (M/C)
Wksp
0% / 100%
N/A
100% / 0%
VanillaDP
88% / 12%
71% / 19%
100% / 0%
HistoryDP
0% / 100%
50% / 50%
100% / 0%
Keyframe
0% / 100%
0% / 100%
100% / 0%
Having established that workspace mod-
els successfully amortize VLM reasoning,
we now evaluate whether this translates
to downstream task performance.
Fig-
ure 6 shows success rates across all four
tasks. Workspace models achieve the high-
est success rate in every task, with a
cross-task average of 91.5% ± 2.2 signif-
icantly ahead of the next best baseline,
Keyframe, at 66.8% ± 3.2. Notably, this improvement holds in both simulation and the real world.
This is our most surprising finding: Wksp outperforms Keyframe not only on latency (which was
the original motivation), but also on success rate. Below, we dig into the mechanisms that lead to this
performance gap.
5
Why do Workspace Models Exhibit Better Task Performance?
In this section, we account for the surprising finding that workspace models, despite being targeted at
amortizing key-frame lookup, actually outperform key-frame lookup.
5.1
Full Histories and Key-Frame History Both Induce Control-Failure
We first begin by categorizing the failure modes exhibited by different methods as either memory-related
errors, where the robot correctly executes a skill but targets the wrong mode (i.e. putting 3 blocks away
and pressing done instead of 5), or control-related errors, where the robot fails to execute a manipulation
9


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
0
2
5
10
20
30
Keyframe-time Jitter
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Success Rate
Noise Effects of Keyframe Training
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Timestep
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Normalized Attention Weight
Attention Map
Figure 7: Left: Success as a function of noise from optimal timings. Right: Attention scores (average over 10
trajectories) measured relative to the average score at a given offset from the current timestep. Gray areas are
segments of important events to remember
skill (i.e. missing a grasp of a block). We share results of failures within simulation experiments in
Table 2, finding that VanillaDP unsurprisingly suffers from memory-related errors but rarely fails to
execute an action mode.
Weaknesses of Frame Stacking Methods.
The frame-stacking methods (i.e. HistoryDP and
Keyframe) tend to contain good memory but fail more often with control. Wksp seems to be able to
balance both memory and control. Qualitatively, HistoryDP and Keyframe select the correct task
mode, but fail on fine-grained motions. In DRAWERRECALL for example, HistoryDP often selects the
correct drawer to open, but misses the handle slightly. Keyframe exhibits these failure modes as well
and sometimes freezes while opening the drawer. In real-world experiments, we observe that failures of
control precision can resemble mode-selection failures unrelated to the correct memory: for example,
Keyframe and HistoryDP both attempt to pick in the middle of the two cubes or to grasp 8-10cm
above the cube. This led us to form a hypothesis that the performance gap in Figure 6 stems from
a common failure mode across both HistoryDP and Keyframe - adding more frames into context
introduces generalization error that outweighs the benefit of richer history.
5.2
Keyframe-based methods introduce control aliasing.
Next, we identify a second failure mode: explicit frame selection methods (whether strided, as in
HistoryDP, or VLM-based, as in Keyframe) create an aliased input structure during training that
may be prone to distribution shift from their narrow training distributions.
To examine this, we train Keyframe with oracle keyframe timings at both training and deploy-
ment and find imperfect performance. Interestingly, adding moderate jitter to the training distribution
of event times significantly improves performance as shown in Figure 7, but then falls as this training
neighborhood is expanded too wide. This illustrates the balance between making the distribution of
keyframes wide enough to prevent learning a brittle policy and not so wide that history coverage be-
comes slim and causes overfitting, as shown by Mark et al. [2026]. The Keyframe method manages to
introduce some jitter to counteract aliasing, as shown by its natural noise level (σ ≈10.1) and strong
performance with an oracle at test time (∼0.96). However, its success then relies on noisy VLM curation
during train-time and perfect curation at deployment. Next, we show how Wksp naturally remedies
this by virtue of being a smooth representation.
5.3
Why do Workspace Models Generalize Better?
We now show that the workspace model exhibits smoothness in both its own training input, due to (1)
training with full global attention over time, and (2) smoothness in its outputs (i.e. the policy inputs).
10


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Figure 8: We show images and their timesteps which correspond to moments when a slot probability crosses a
threshold of 0.5 (top). The moments where slots move above the threshold are “decoder slot events” shown with
dotted lines. We also show the slot probabilities across time for every slot along with the VLM-supervised labels.
As seen, decoder firings slightly diverge from the ground truth in order to match up to the event’s general visual
features, creating a smoothing effect (bottom).
Benefits of global attention.
As evidence of (1), we identify that the workspace encoder itself attends
across all available timesteps, learning to attend smoothly to the temporal sequence as opposed to paying
full attention to discrete timesteps. In Figure 7, we show how the workspace encoder attends across
adjacent salient times, smoothing out attention and mitigating sensitivity to aliasing effects as seen in
its attention weights along with the decoder firing probabilities in Figure 8.
Smoothness in workspace outputs.
Towards (2), we show that workspace tokens (i.e. the workspace
model outputs) are smooth from their PCA in Figure 9. These illustrate how tokens vary smoothly across
time as well as their detected event triggers from the decoder. This smoothness is created by two major
factors. First, our saliency pipeline creates smoothened median labels as seen in Figure 9 since it has
access to the full trajectory while labeling events as opposed to Keyframe which maintains a future-
unaware labeling pipeline to match test-time labeling. Second, we naturally create smoothness through
using an empirical risk minimization optimization across the dataset, creating an averaged encoding
that must work robustly across many trajectories. This is seen in Figure 8 where there exist semantic
similarities between event frames and a smooth increase in probability over the event occurrence. With
these results, we generally advocate for latent memory representations, and claim these characteristics
of compressing history are especially significant to ensure downstream imitative policies are robust.
6
Discussion
We present workspace models as a solution to the problem of long-horizon memory in robotic manipu-
lation. By amortizing VLM reasoning at training time, we obtain a fast, robust encoder that generalizes
better than VLM-in-the-loop alternatives. The specific instantiation we propose (saliency sets as image
11


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Figure 9: Left: A plot of the VLM detections of an event across time with the green lines representing the labels
generated. Right: A PCA of the workspace token representations across a rollout.
patches, a DETR-style decoder) is one way to realize this idea, and many alternatives are worth explor-
ing as well as other forms of VLM supervision. For instance, future work could extend the method to
multi-camera streams, encode language reasoning traces, or incorporate dynamics prediction.
More broadly, we hope this work encourages that perspective. The core principle extends beyond
robotics and memory - anywhere a powerful foundation model is queried repeatedly at test-time to
solve a structured subtask, there may be an opportunity to amortize that reasoning into a faster and
more robust learned module. And as we have shown, amortization can lead to even stronger results
than stronger models in the loop.
Limitations.
While the workspace model works well, it relies on a fully autoregressive transformer
encoder. This quadratically scales computation, and can become cumbersome at very long sequence
lengths. To ameliorate this, we can train workspace models to be recurrent, block diagonal in their at-
tention masks to reduce overhead, or employ KV-caching. Workspace models also receive supervision on
what visual information is salient through a VLM which may not be fully grounded in determining which
parts of an image are relevant to control. Reinforcement learning can provide an option for ground-
ing in task reward. Lastly, we do not compare to hierarchical methods utilizing language-summaries
and VLAs, but this would be interesting to examine along with how workspaces can be combined with
generalist policies in the multi-task setting.
7
Acknowledgments
We want to express our gratitude to Younghyo Park, Ryan Bahlous-Boldi, and Antonia Bronars for rele-
vant commentary about the work, along with the Improbable AI Lab community for fruitful discussions.
This research was financially supported by the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy (MOTIE), Korea,
under the "Global Industrial Technology Cooperation Center program" supervised by the Korea Institute
for Advancement of Technology (KIAT). (Grant No. P0028435). This material is based upon work sup-
ported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. (NSF grant
2141064).
8
Author Contributions
Nitish Dashora co-developed the project direction, architecture, experimental design, hardware exper-
iments, paper writing, and code development
Douglas Chen contributed to writing, experimental design, and code development
Idan Shenfeld co-developed the project direction, contributed to writing and experimental design, and
provided conceptual guidance
12


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
John Marangola contributed to hardware experiments
Pulkit Agrawal played a role in paper writing and high-level advising
Max Simchowitz co-developed the project direction, architecture, experimental design, and played a
significant role in paper writing
References
Bernard J. Baars. Global workspace theory of consciousness: toward a cognitive neuroscience of human
experience. In Steven Laureys, editor, The Boundaries of Consciousness: Neurobiology and Neuropathol-
ogy, volume 150 of Progress in Brain Research, pages 45–53. Elsevier, 2005. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0079-6123(05)50004-9.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0079612305500049.
Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei
Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhifang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang,
Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, Mei Li, Kaixin Li, Zicheng Lin, Junyang Lin,
Xuejing Liu, Jiawei Liu, Chenglong Liu, Yang Liu, Dayiheng Liu, Shixuan Liu, Dunjie Lu, Ruilin Luo,
Chenxu Lv, Rui Men, Lingchen Meng, Xuancheng Ren, Xingzhang Ren, Sibo Song, Yuchong Sun, Jun
Tang, Jianhong Tu, Jianqiang Wan, Peng Wang, Pengfei Wang, Qiuyue Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Tianbao
Xie, Yiheng Xu, Haiyang Xu, Jin Xu, Zhibo Yang, Mingkun Yang, Jianxin Yang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Fei
Zhang, Hang Zhang, Xi Zhang, Bo Zheng, Humen Zhong, Jingren Zhou, Fan Zhou, Jing Zhou, Yuanzhi
Zhu, and Ke Zhu. Qwen3-vl technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.21631.
Amin Banayeeanzade, Fatemeh Bahrani, Yutai Zhou, and Erdem Bıyık. Gabril: Gaze-based regulariza-
tion for mitigating causal confusion in imitation learning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2507.19647.
Yoshua Bengio. The consciousness prior, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1709.08568.
Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy
Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. pi0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot
control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164, 2024.
Nils Blank, Moritz Reuss, Marcel Rühle, Ömer Erdinç Ya˘gmurlu, Fabian Wenzel, Oier Mees, and Rudolf
Lioutikov. Scaling robot policy learning via zero-shot labeling with foundation models, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.17772.
Gavin Brown, Adam Pocock, Ming-Jie Zhao, and Mikel Luján. Conditional likelihood maximisation: a
unifying framework for information theoretic feature selection. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 13(1):27–66,
January 2012. ISSN 1532-4435.
Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey
Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2005.12872.
Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li, Silvio
Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, et al.
Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model
repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran Song.
Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04137,
2023.
13


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Christopher Clark, Yue Yang, Jae Sung Park, Zixian Ma, Jieyu Zhang, Rohun Tripathi, Mohammadreza
Salehi, Sangho Lee, Taira Anderson, Winson Han, and Ranjay Krishna. Molmopoint: Better pointing
for vlms with grounding tokens, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.28069.
Pim De Haan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Sergey Levine. Causal confusion in imitation learning. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Jiafei Duan, Wentao Yuan, Wilbert Pumacay, Yi Ru Wang, Kiana Ehsani, Dieter Fox, and Ranjay Kr-
ishna. Manipulate-anything: Automating real-world robots using vision-language models, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.18915.
Sabri Eyuboglu, Ryan Ehrlich, Simran Arora, Neel Guha, Dylan Zinsley, Emily Liu, Will Tennien, Atri
Rudra, James Zou, Azalia Mirhoseini, and Christopher Re.
Cartridges: Lightweight and general-
purpose long context representations via self-study, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.
06266.
Product Manual Franka Research 3. Franka Robotics GmbH, 2025. URL https://www.franka.de.
Document number: R02210, Release 1.5.1.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
Bethge, and Felix A. Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine Intelli-
gence, 2(11):665–673, November 2020. ISSN 2522-5839. doi: 10.1038/s42256-020-00257-z. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s42256-020-00257-z.
Litian Gong, Fatemeh Bahrani, Yutai Zhou, Amin Banayeeanzade, Jiachen Li, and Erdem Bıyık.
Autofocus-il: Vlm-based saliency maps for data-efficient visual imitation learning without extra hu-
man annotations, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.18617.
Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan
Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al. π0.5: a vision-language-action model with
open-world generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054, 2025.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. Attention is not explanation, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1902.10186.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L. Littman, and Anthony R. Cassandra. Planning and acting in partially
observable stochastic domains. Artif. Intell., 101(1–2):99–134, May 1998. ISSN 0004-3702.
Jeff Huber Kelly Hong, Anton Troynikov. Context rot: How increasing input tokens impacts llm perfor-
mance. https://www.trychroma.com/research/context-rot, 2025. Accessed: 2025-07-14.
Oussama Khatib. A unified approach for motion and force control of robot manipulators: The opera-
tional space formulation. IEEE Journal on Robotics and Automation, 3(1):43–53, 1987.
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael
Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar, Benjamin Burchfiel,
Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Openvla: An open-source
vision-language-action model, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09246.
H. W. Kuhn. The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 2(1-
2):83–97, 1955. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.3800020109. URL https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/nav.3800020109.
14


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
M. Land, Neil Mennie, and Jennifer Rusted. The roles of vision and eye movements in the control of
activities of daily living. Perception, 28:1311–28, 02 1999. doi: 10.1068/p2935.
Anthony Liang, Jesse Thomason, and Erdem Bıyık. Visarl: Visual reinforcement learning guided by
human saliency, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.10940.
Huan Liu and Rudy Setiono. Chi2: Feature selection and discretization of numeric attributes. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, TAI ’95, page 88,
USA, 1995. IEEE Computer Society. ISBN 0818673125.
Wei-Yin Loh. Classification and regression trees. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowl-
edge Discovery, 1:14 – 23, 01 2011. doi: 10.1002/widm.8.
Max Sobol Mark, Jacky Liang, Maria Attarian, Chuyuan Fu, Debidatta Dwibedi, Dhruv Shah, and Aviral
Kumar. Bpp: Long-context robot imitation learning by focusing on key history frames, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15010.
Volodymyr Mnih, Nicolas Heess, Alex Graves, and Koray Kavukcuoglu.
Recurrent models of visual
attention, 2014. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.6247.
Kaichun Mo, Shilin Zhu, Angel X. Chang, Li Yi, Subarna Tripathi, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Hao Su. Part-
Net: A large-scale benchmark for fine-grained and hierarchical part-level 3D object understanding.
In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2019.
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual rea-
soning with a general conditioning layer, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1709.07871.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
image segmentation, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
Stéphane Ross and Drew Bagnell. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In Proceedings of the thir-
teenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pages 661–668. JMLR Workshop
and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured
prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on ar-
tificial intelligence and statistics, pages 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
Akanksha Saran, Ruohan Zhang, Elaine Schaertl Short, and Scott Niekum. Efficiently guiding imitation
learning agents with human gaze, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.12500.
Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, Zichen Cui, Ariuntuya Arty Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior trans-
formers: Cloning k modes with one stone. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
22955–22968, 2022.
Max Simchowitz, Daniel Pfrommer, and Ali Jadbabaie. The pitfalls of imitation learning when actions
are continuous. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09722, 2025.
Oriane Siméoni, Huy V. Vo, Maximilian Seitzer, Federico Baldassarre, Maxime Oquab, Cijo Jose, Vasil
Khalidov, Marc Szafraniec, Seungeun Yi, Michaël Ramamonjisoa, Francisco Massa, Daniel Haziza,
Luca Wehrstedt, Jianyuan Wang, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Leonel Sentana, Claire Roberts,
Andrea Vedaldi, Jamie Tolan, John Brandt, Camille Couprie, Julien Mairal, Hervé Jégou, Patrick La-
batut, and Piotr Bojanowski. Dinov3, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10104.
15


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Xingyou Song, Yiding Jiang, Stephen Tu, Yilun Du, and Behnam Neyshabur. Observational overfitting
in reinforcement learning, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.02975.
Ajay Sridhar, Jennifer Pan, Satvik Sharma, and Chelsea Finn. Memer: Scaling up memory for robot
control via experience retrieval, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.20328.
Austin Stone, Ted Xiao, Yao Lu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kuang-Huei Lee, Quan Vuong, Paul
Wohlhart, Sean Kirmani, Brianna Zitkovich, Fei Xia, Chelsea Finn, and Karol Hausman. Open-world
object manipulation using pre-trained vision-language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2303.00905.
Stone Tao, Fanbo Xiang, Arth Shukla, Yuzhe Qin, Xander Hinrichsen, Xiaodi Yuan, Chen Bao, Xinsong
Lin, Yulin Liu, Tse kai Chan, Yuan Gao, Xuanlin Li, Tongzhou Mu, Nan Xiao, Arnav Gurha, Viswesh Na-
gaswamy Rajesh, Yong Woo Choi, Yen-Ru Chen, Zhiao Huang, Roberto Calandra, Rui Chen, Shan Luo,
and Hao Su. Maniskill3: Gpu parallelized robotics simulation and rendering for generalizable em-
bodied ai. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2025.
Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah
Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, Louis Rouillard, Thomas Mesnard,
Geoffrey Cideron, Jean bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec, Michelle Casbon, Etienne Pot,
Ivo Penchev, Gaël Liu, Francesco Visin, Kathleen Kenealy, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohai Zhai, Anton Tsitsulin,
Robert Busa-Fekete, Alex Feng, Noveen Sachdeva, Benjamin Coleman, Yi Gao, Basil Mustafa, Iain
Barr, Emilio Parisotto, David Tian, Matan Eyal, Colin Cherry, Jan-Thorsten Peter, Danila Sinopal-
nikov, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh Agarwal, Mehran Kazemi, Dan Malkin, Ravin Kumar, David Vilar,
Idan Brusilovsky, Jiaming Luo, Andreas Steiner, Abe Friesen, Abhanshu Sharma, Abheesht Sharma,
Adi Mayrav Gilady, Adrian Goedeckemeyer, Alaa Saade, Alex Feng, Alexander Kolesnikov, Alexei Ben-
debury, Alvin Abdagic, Amit Vadi, András György, André Susano Pinto, Anil Das, Ankur Bapna, Antoine
Miech, Antoine Yang, Antonia Paterson, Ashish Shenoy, Ayan Chakrabarti, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Bobak
Shahriari, Bryce Petrini, Charlie Chen, Charline Le Lan, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, CJ Carey,
Cormac Brick, Daniel Deutsch, Danielle Eisenbud, Dee Cattle, Derek Cheng, Dimitris Paparas, Di-
vyashree Shivakumar Sreepathihalli, Doug Reid, Dustin Tran, Dustin Zelle, Eric Noland, Erwin
Huizenga, Eugene Kharitonov, Frederick Liu, Gagik Amirkhanyan, Glenn Cameron, Hadi Hashemi,
Hanna Klimczak-Pluci´nska, Harman Singh, Harsh Mehta, Harshal Tushar Lehri, Hussein Hazimeh,
Ian Ballantyne, Idan Szpektor, Ivan Nardini, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Jetha Chan, Joe Stanton, John
Wieting, Jonathan Lai, Jordi Orbay, Joseph Fernandez, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Jyotinder Singh,
Kat Black, Kathy Yu, Kevin Hui, Kiran Vodrahalli, Klaus Greff, Linhai Qiu, Marcella Valentine, Ma-
rina Coelho, Marvin Ritter, Matt Hoffman, Matthew Watson, Mayank Chaturvedi, Michael Moyni-
han, Min Ma, Nabila Babar, Natasha Noy, Nathan Byrd, Nick Roy, Nikola Momchev, Nilay Chauhan,
Noveen Sachdeva, Oskar Bunyan, Pankil Botarda, Paul Caron, Paul Kishan Rubenstein, Phil Culli-
ton, Philipp Schmid, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Pingmei Xu, Piotr Stanczyk, Pouya Tafti, Rakesh Shivanna,
Renjie Wu, Renke Pan, Reza Rokni, Rob Willoughby, Rohith Vallu, Ryan Mullins, Sammy Jerome,
Sara Smoot, Sertan Girgin, Shariq Iqbal, Shashir Reddy, Shruti Sheth, Siim Põder, Sijal Bhatnagar,
Sindhu Raghuram Panyam, Sivan Eiger, Susan Zhang, Tianqi Liu, Trevor Yacovone, Tyler Liechty,
Uday Kalra, Utku Evci, Vedant Misra, Vincent Roseberry, Vlad Feinberg, Vlad Kolesnikov, Woohyun
Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xi Chen, Yinlam Chow, Yuvein Zhu, Zichuan Wei, Zoltan Egyed, Victor Cotruta,
Minh Giang, Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Kat Black, Nabila Babar, Jessica Lo, Erica Moreira, Luiz Gus-
tavo Martins, Omar Sanseviero, Lucas Gonzalez, Zach Gleicher, Tris Warkentin, Vahab Mirrokni, Evan
Senter, Eli Collins, Joelle Barral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, Yossi Matias, D. Sculley, Slav
Petrov, Noah Fiedel, Noam Shazeer, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Rohan Anil, Dmitry, Lepikhin, Sebas-
16


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
tian Borgeaud, Olivier Bachem, Armand Joulin, Alek Andreev, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, and
Léonard Hussenot. Gemma 3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19786.
Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Soci-
ety: Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267–288, 12 2018. ISSN 0035-9246. doi: 10.1111/j.2517-6161.
1996.tb02080.x. URL https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1996.tb02080.x.
Naftali Tishby and Noga Zaslavsky. Deep learning and the information bottleneck principle, 2015. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02406.
Marcel Torne, Andy Tang, Yuejiang Liu, and Chelsea Finn. Learning long-context diffusion policies via
past-token prediction, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09561.
Marcel Torne, Karl Pertsch, Homer Walke, Kyle Vedder, Suraj Nair, Brian Ichter, Allen Z. Ren, Haohuan
Wang, Jiaming Tang, Kyle Stachowicz, Karan Dhabalia, Michael Equi, Quan Vuong, Jost Tobias Sprin-
genberg, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Danny Driess. Mem: Multi-scale embodied memory for
vision language action models, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.03596.
Chuan Wen, Jierui Lin, Trevor Darrell, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Yang Gao. Fighting copycat agents in
behavioral cloning from observation histories, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.14876.
Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao Jiang,
Yifu Yuan, He Wang, Li Yi, Angel X. Chang, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Hao Su. SAPIEN: A simulated part-
based interactive environment. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), June 2020.
Lei Yu and Huan Liu. Feature selection for high-dimensional data: A fast correlation-based filter solution.
In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on machine learning (ICML-03), pages 856–863,
2003.
Wentao Yuan, Jiafei Duan, Valts Blukis, Wilbert Pumacay, Ranjay Krishna, Adithyavairavan Murali, Ar-
salan Mousavian, and Dieter Fox. Robopoint: A vision-language model for spatial affordance predic-
tion for robotics, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.10721.
Tony Z. Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manip-
ulation with low-cost hardware, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13705.
Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan
Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, Quan Vuong, Vincent Vanhoucke, Huong Tran, Radu Soricut, Anikait Singh,
Jaspiar Singh, Pierre Sermanet, Pannag R. Sanketi, Grecia Salazar, Michael S. Ryoo, Krista Reymann,
Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Igor Mordatch, Henryk Michalewski, Yao Lu, Sergey Levine, Lisa Lee,
Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Isabel Leal, Yuheng Kuang, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Ryan Julian, Nikhil J. Joshi,
Alex Irpan, Brian Ichter, Jasmine Hsu, Alexander Herzog, Karol Hausman, Keerthana Gopalakrish-
nan, Chuyuan Fu, Pete Florence, Chelsea Finn, Kumar Avinava Dubey, Danny Driess, Tianli Ding,
Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Xi Chen, Yevgen Chebotar, Justice Carbajal, Noah Brown, Anthony
Brohan, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, and Kehang Han. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer
web knowledge to robotic control. In Jie Tan, Marc Toussaint, and Kourosh Darvish, editors, Proceed-
ings of The 7th Conference on Robot Learning, volume 229 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 2165–2183. PMLR, 06–09 Nov 2023.
17


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Background: Training History-Based Robotic Policies
3
3
Amortizing History Summarization via Workspace Models
4
3.1
Workspace Model Training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
VLM Saliency Labeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Workspace Models Achieve High Task Success with Low Inference Latency
7
4.1
Evaluation Tasks: Measuring Different Axes of Memory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Workspace Models Successfully Amortize VLM Reasoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
Workspace models surprisingly outperform all baselines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Why do Workspace Models Exhibit Better Task Performance?
9
5.1
Full Histories and Key-Frame History Both Induce Control-Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.2
Keyframe-based methods introduce control aliasing.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.3
Why do Workspace Models Generalize Better? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6
Discussion
11
7
Acknowledgments
12
8
Author Contributions
12
A
Extended Related Work
19
B
Architecture and Training Details
20
B.1
Diffusion Policy Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
B.2
Workspace Model Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
C
Prompting
21
C.1
Event Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
C.2
Post Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
D Experimental Setup and Details
22
D.1 Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
D.2 Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
E
Ablation Studies
24
18


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
A
Extended Related Work
Generalization in Robotics. We desire a system which can be conditioned on historical information
to enable capabilities like in-context learning, adaptation, or memory-intensive reasoning. But in many
settings, exposing a learning system to more information can actually hurt performance. Geirhos et al.
[2020] describe shortcut learning, the phenomenon where deep learning systems can learn “shortcut”
strategies to achieve the training objective that do not generalize to other conditions. This is connected
to causal confusion seen in imitation learning [De Haan et al., 2019] or observational overfitting in
RL [Song et al., 2019] where access to more information seemingly hurts performance by giving more
potential irrelevant cues to learn from, thus hurting generalization. When policies are exposed to ob-
servational histories, this confusion can also show up as “copycat” behavior [Wen et al., 2020], where
the learner exploits short-range correlations in demonstration trajectories rather than inferring the la-
tent state that should drive action selection. This makes learning policies that require history especially
difficult without auxiliary temporal objectives [Torne et al., 2025] or some form of information selec-
tion [Mark et al., 2026, Sridhar et al., 2025]. There are a handful of classic approaches to manage
information selection.
Information Selection. The idea of information filtering has roots in classic machine learning,
statistics, and information theory. Early contributions involved implicit feature selection through the
Lasso penalty [Tibshirani, 2018] or explicit statistical testing [Liu and Setiono, 1995]. Other methods
use information-theoretic objectives [Loh, 2011, Brown et al., 2012] or correlative measures [Yu and
Liu, 2003]. However, these methods often break down in deep learning with high-dimensional data.
A popular line of work for studying compression of information and task-relevance is the information
bottleneck (IB) design choice [Tishby and Zaslavsky, 2015], where the architecture design forces com-
pression of information in the middle of the neural network. However, models still fall prey to not
knowing what may be falsely task-relevant without having enough data [De Haan et al., 2019, Geirhos
et al., 2020], which is exacerbated in high-dimensional settings. Moreover, IB lacks a direct analog for
modern diffusion-based pipelines. Some newer methods involve learning attention maps, but they do
not learn explanations for predictions, and are uncorrelated with feature importance [Jain and Wallace,
2019], incurring quadratic costs. Other methods involve more active selective processing [Mnih et al.,
2014] but require expensive RL tuning. So, many practitioners have turned to using human-like general
priors for determining what information is useful to maintain for a task. These usually leverage some
foundation model, particularly a vision-language model (VLM).
VLM Guidance. One way to leverage a VLM for this is to supervise where the policy should at-
tend. Some work has shown that human gaze can serve as an auxiliary signal for action planning [Land
et al., 1999] and robust imitation learning [Saran et al., 2021, Banayeeanzade et al., 2025], but col-
lecting gaze or human-saliency is expensive [Liang et al., 2024]. Therefore, VLMs have been used to
provide guidance through different means such as saliency maps [Gong et al., 2025], direct supervi-
sion [Blank et al., 2024], or planning [Stone et al., 2023, Duan et al., 2024]. Furthermore, a growing
line of work concerns grounding VLMs in order to provide spatial information that can be leveraged
by downstream controllers to replace narrowly-trained perception systems [Yuan et al., 2024, Clark
et al., 2026]. However, these VLM systems don’t directly address the history compression problem we
see when long contexts are required. For this problem, Mark et al. [2026] study using VLMs during
execution to select keyframes that correspond to behaviorally salient events. Sridhar et al. [2025] and
Torne et al. [2026] use multimodal memory to produce ongoing language summaries to prompt a VLA
with. These techniques all require heavy in-the-loop VLM planning, pointing towards latent memory as
a potential solution. Our method implements a latent form of memory resembling Cartridges [Eyuboglu
et al., 2025], KV-caches distilled from corpora offline to amortize attention for reasoning. Workspace
Models similarly distill VLM history curation into a latent embedding for memory-intensive planning.
19


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
B
Architecture and Training Details
B.1
Diffusion Policy Details
Table 3: Hyperparameters for Diffusion Policy Training.
Component
Hyperparameter
Value
Training
–total-iters
500,000
–batch-size
128
–lr
1 × 10−4
Architecture
–obs-horizon
2
–act-horizon
8
–pred-horizon
16
–diffusion-step-embed-dim
64
–unet-dims
[64, 128, 256]
–n-groups
8
–num-denoising-steps
100
Data
–control-mode
pd_ee_pose
We train imitative policies by approximating the conditional action distribution p(At|Ot) through a
diffusion model, as done in Diffusion Policy [Chi et al., 2023]. This is done by sampling a true data
sample, A0
t from D, iteratively corrupting it with noise through a schedule parameterized by α, γ, and
σ2, and learning a network, εθ, to predict the corruption noise through the following loss:
Laction = MSE(εk,εθ(A0
t + ek,Ot, k))
To sample from this learned distribution, we first sample a noisy Ak
t ∼N (0, I) and denoise k times to
produce an uncorrupted sample A0
t. Denoising is done through the following equation:
Ak−1
t
= α(Ak
t −γεθ(Ak
t,Ot, k) + N(0,σ2I))
Our noise-prediction network, εθ is implemented as a 1D U-Net with FiLM conditioning [Perez et al.,
2017, Ronneberger et al., 2015] where Ot linearly modulates the activations through the U-Net. We
append training details for the Wksp and VanillaDP models in Table 3.
B.2
Workspace Model Details
For training, we use one seed and utilize an 80/20 split. We choose the lowest-validation-loss model
and embed the full dataset with that model for imitative training. We now specify model details in this
section, particularly how information is fed into the workspace encoder. At every timestep, an image It
and proprioceptive state xt are received. We convert It into patches through DinoV3 and use a single
layer cross-attention pooling mechanism. This converts all patches into 1 token (through a learned
fixed query token). We use a simple MLP to map xt into a proprioceptive token and concatenate it
with the pooled image token, giving a tokenized observation function ¯ot = tokenize(ot) where ot =
[It, xt]. We use a sequence of these tokenized inputs, each with its own padding token, z, to generate
a sequence of workspace tokens in one forward pass. The outputs corresponding to the padding inputs
are the workspace tokens. During training we use causal masking so that during runtime we do not
require the future when producing the current workspace token. In practice, we use a learned positional
20


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
embedding within every timestep (across the image, proprioceptive, and padding tokens), and a fixed
sinusoidal positional embedding across all timesteps.
We include hyperparameters for training our
model in Table 4 with abbreviations CD (CUBEDROP), DR (DRAWERRECALL), BB (BALANCEBAR), and
HnH (HALFANDHALF). We also shorten dinov3-convnext-tiny-pretrain-lvd1689m as DCT and
dinov3-vitb16-pretrain-lvd1689m as DVB.
C
Prompting
C.1
Event Detection
Here, we discuss the details of the VLM labeling pipeline. Recall that the workspace token contains
information about both the past and present, compressing both temporally and spatially. Therefore,
at a given time step, we distinguish between two different types of patches in our salient sets. At every
time step, we can have event and transient patches. Event patches are specialized to an event, are
chosen at the time of the event, and remain in the salient set. Transient patches are relevant in the
present only and exist in the salient set for the current time.
This leads us to the first set of parameters for the labeling pipelines. We have 4 prompts: task_desc-
ription, event_detection, event_patch, and transient_patch, all working together to label
events and patches. We primarily use two models, Qwen3-VL for event labeling, and MolmoPoint-8B
for pointing (which is then used for patch labeling). We pass in prompt templates (Fig. 10) alongside the
current RGB frame to the labeling models. The event labeling returns either “yes” or “no” for whether
an event has been detected. The point labeling returns a list of (pixel_x, pixel_y) points in the
RGB frame’s pixel space, which we normalize to [0,1] and ultimately convert into patch indices. We
also have 2 other shared parameters: sample_rate, max_events. The sampling rate is the frequency
at which we run event labeling. Meanwhile, the max event count controls the maximum number of
events; we detail the effect this has on post-processing for each pipeline in Appendix C.2
C.2
Post Processing
For the Wksp labeling pipeline, all positive frames are first sorted by their time step. We then group
them into segments where a new segment starts only when the gap from the previous positive frame
is larger than min_event_separation_steps. Then the middle position frame in each segment is
chosen as the event. We do a final post processing step: if we have more than max_events, we take
the first max_events events. For Wksp we also track transient patches every tracking_interval
frames.
For the Keyframe labeling pipeline, we only start classifying after ignore_before and we treat
any timestep on a rising edge, where the current classification is “yes” and the previous classification
is “no”, as a keyframe. After detecting a keyframe, we skip ahead by cooldown and continue sam-
pling every sample_rate after as usual. We store the keyframes in a FIFO buffer; when we go over
max_events, we evict the oldest keyframe and add in the new keyframe.
CubeDrop Prompts
Event Detection Prompt
Is the black gripper above the gray bowl?
Event Point Prompt
gray bowl
Transient Tracking Point Prompt
yellow block
21


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Event Prompt
This is frame {timestep} from a robot demonstration of the task
{task_description}.
{event_prompt}.
Look ONLY at this single frame.
Answer
with a single word:
yes or no.
Point Prompt
Point to the {transient/event patch}
Figure 10: Prompt templates used for event detection and point prediction.
BalanceBar Prompts
Event Detection Prompt
Is the gripper lifting the brown bar straight up from the middle while the bar is
still close to the table surface?
Event Point Prompt
brown balance bar
Transient Tracking Point Prompt
brown balance bar
DrawerRecall Prompts
Event Detection Prompt
Is the left robot gripper grasping the yellow block with an open drawer in the
scene?
Event Point Prompt
the drawer that the left robot gripper is opening
Transient Tracking Point Prompt
yellow block
HalfAndHalf Prompts
Event Detection Prompt
Is the black robot gripper above the brown box?
Event Point Prompt
robot gripper
Transient Tracking Point Prompt
black cubes
D
Experimental Setup and Details
D.1
Simulation
ManiSkill3 is configured to run at 100 Hz. All data collection in simulation is scripted with simple linear
motion planners with privileged state information. We run our policies and data collection at 20Hz with
PD control on a 7D action including end-effector pose and gripper state.
CUBEDROP In this task, the robot must place exactly 5 cubes into a bowl; however, once something
is placed in the bowl, it becomes invisible. We randomly re-spawn blocks after they are placed in
the bowl to emphasize the need for present-time perception as well. Once 5 cubes are added, the
22


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
robot must press a green button to confirm it is done. The robot succeeds if and only if it presses the
green button after having exactly 5 cubes in the bowl. We use 272 trajectories for training. The main
failure modes we observe with VanillaDP involve not pressing this green button at the right time;
however, it does exhibit the strongest manipulation capabilities, always quickly and effectively picking
the cubes. This supports the hypothesis regarding how lower observation horizons allow for better
function fitting. When adding other frames, HistoryDP and Keyframe sometimes miss grasps, with
Keyframe alleviating the fitting issues as the input frames are more consistent.
DRAWERRECALL In this task, the robot observes a secondary robot open a drawer, pick up a cube,
place it into the drawer, and then close it. This is done such that it is impossible for the primary robot
to know which drawer the cube is within after the drawer is closed. The robot’s task is to then open the
correct drawer. We utilize 272 demonstrations for training
Figure 11:
Each black square repre-
sents a cube, and the letter represents
where the robot must put it (either the
right or left box). The test configuration
requires memory of the past
BALANCEBAR This task involves lifting a long bar such that it is
level (e.g., zero degrees of tilt about the midpoint). However, the
bar has one of 3 centers of mass (CoM). The demonstrations begin
with an attempted pick from the midpoint, revealing a tilt. The
demos then include lifting the bar from the correct CoM, resulting
in a balanced lift. For the learner, success is counted if the bar is
picked in a balanced way in the second try. We utilize 272 training
demonstrations.
D.2
Hardware
We use operational space control Khatib [1987] to relay torque
commands to the robot.
τ = J T Mx(q)

Kpe −Kd˙e

+ N Tτ0
Here, e corresponds to pose error, Mx is the task space inertia
matrix, and N is a nullspace projector. Our teleoperation data
(N = 300) is collected at 50Hz with 6D rotation, 3D position, and
continuous gripper values. We predict 10D action targets in the
same format as our observations. We perform Gram-Schmidt or-
thonormalization on the 6D rotation component of the predicted
actions before they are fed into the operational space controller running at 1kHz.
Table 6: Success vs. Supervision
Supervision Target
CD
DR
BB
Average
Point
63
100
88
84
Patch
92
100
89
94
Image
0
100
91
64
HALFANDHALF We construct this task where
the objective is to equally partition a set of N ∈
{2,4} 4cm x 4cm x 4cm cubes into two boxes that
are too tall to see into with the global camera. As
depicted in Figure 11, the teleoperator follows
a pattern for placing cubes into the bin which
necessitates having memory to determine which
box to put the next cube inside. We evaluate on
the initial configuration shown (i.e. 2 cubes in the middle column). We show results in Figure 6 for
evaluation across 20 trials. We find that VanillaDP gets around 50% success since half the time it
will put both in the right bin, or do the task correctly. This is since it does not have memory of whether
it started with the 4 cube initial state or 2 cube initial state when it is placing the last cube. When we do
endow the model with memory in HistoryDP and Keyframe, we find degradation of performance.
The common failure mode was an inability to correctly pick and place the cubes by grasping in between
the cubes or not grasping with the right depth. To ameliorate this, we trained these policies with wrist
camera feeds observing some performance boost as reported in Figure 6. We use 75 demonstrations of
23


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
the 4 configurations shown in Figure 11, resulting in 300 trajectories. Wrist camera feeds were included
by simply training a CNN encoder and concatenating it to the global camera encoding. For Keyframe
and Wksp, we pruned erroneous detections of events at t < 30 that sometimes appeared in training
data. Furthermore, we simply used constant positions for the transient patches (initialized where the
cubes start).
E
Ablation Studies
Supervision Type We also choose to ablate across different reconstruction targets to see which one
forms the best latent representation for the downstream task. Instead of predicting the features for the
patch which overlaps where MolmoPoint points, we can directly predict the 2D points during workspace
model training. Another option is to predict the features across the whole image rather than the patch
of interest. We do this full-image supervision by predicting the average pooled patch feature. Our
hypothesis is that point-based supervision is too lossy of a compression which removes relevant details
such as rotations (which may be relevant for grasping) or visual features that could be relevant to the
downstream task. Full-image supervision, on the other hand, can mix a lot of irrelevant information
into the reconstruction target, which can cause potentially spurious correlations or simply increase the
noise in our representations. These hypotheses are supported by our results in Table 6 where we see
that point-based supervision is strong yet underperforms the patch-based system. Meanwhile, the full-
image system performs exceptionally well, but catastrophically breaks down in CUBEDROP, presumably
because this task requires the most fine-grained perception since cubes are spawned in randomized
locations.
VLM Detection In Figure 9 we include the event firing plot of the VLM for HALFANDHALF that re-
sults from using the prompts specified for that task across every frame. It shows when VLM-prompted
keyframes are detected and reveals an interesting pattern. First, there is a large amount of noisiness em-
bedded in this detection process, which can be detrimental at runtime for test-time keyframe selection
methods. For example, Mark et al. [2026] use “rising-edges” as timesteps to include keyframes, which
would result in an inconsistent number of keyframes for every time. While this issue can be softened by
higher quality VLM API calls, it requires careful prompt tuning and tuned VLM polling intervals. How-
ever, by having access to the full trajectory during train-time, offline saliency-driven labeling enables a
more noise-resistant pipeline that is robust to lower quality VLM detection labels and more consistent
in timings (since it’s a median). The PCA plot also depicts a smooth representation across time, giving
a gradually changing representation across the expert demonstration. In Figure 8, we show the slot
probabilities for the trained workspace model on HALFANDHALF as well as the frames at which the slot
probabilities cross a threshold. It can be observed that the Wksp latent event firing corresponds to highly
semantically similar frames (i.e., the gripper dropping a cube in the box) which displays consistency.
We hypothesize this consistency is derived from the smoothing that can occur from training on many
examples. So, not only does a median-based event time labeling system give resistant labels, but the
distillation process also creates a smoothing effect.
24


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Table 4: Hyperparameters for Workspace Training.
Component
Hyperparameter
CD
DR
BB
HnH
Backbone
Model
DCT
DCT
DCT
DVB
Number of patches
49
49
49
196
Patch dimension
768
768
768
768
Register tokens
0
0
0
4
Frozen
True
True
True
True
Pooler
Pool tokens
1
1
1
1
Layers
1
1
1
1
Attention heads
4
4
4
4
Dropout
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Encoder
Hidden dimension
768
512
512
768
Layers
2
3
3
2
Attention heads
4
4
4
4
MLP ratio
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
Dropout
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Slots
8
8
8
8
Workspace tokens
1
1
1
1
Decoder
Layers
2
2
2
2
Attention heads
4
4
4
4
MLP ratio
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
Dropout
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Trunk hidden dim
768
768
768
768
Trunk layers
2
2
2
2
Feature dim
768
768
768
768
Loss
Existence loss weight
1.0
0.01
0.01
0.01
Feature loss weight
1.0
2.0
2.0
1.0
Existence cost
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Feature cost
0.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
Training
Batch size
32
24
32
8
Learning rate
1 × 10−4
1 × 10−4
1 × 10−4
1 × 10−4
Weight decay
0.01
0.01
0.01
1 × 10−4
Warmup steps
250
250
250
1000
Max steps
5000
12500
15000
25000
Gradient clip
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
25


Workspace Models: Lightweight Robotic Memory via Saliency-Driven Supervision
Table 5: Parameters for VLM Prompting.
Component
Hyperparameter
CD
BB
DR
HnH
Event
Model
Qwen3-VL
Qwen3-VL
Qwen3-VL
Qwen3-VL
Transient
Tracking Interval
2
2
2
N/A
Wksp
Sample Rate
5
4
5
5
Max Events
5
1
1
4
Min Event Separation
20
16
15
75
Keyframe
Sample Rate
5
2
15
5
Cooldown
30
96
1300
300
Ignore Before
0
22
100
50
26
